docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_nutrition_optimization/kids/concept_model.rst, before:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2021_concept_model_vivarium_nutrition_optimization_children:

===================================================
Nutrition Optimization Concept Model: CHILDREN
===================================================

.. contents::
  :local:

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This is the concept model document for the CHILD component of the Nutrition Optimization simulation model.
Documents that contain information specific to the overall model and the pregnancy subcomponent can be found here:

- :ref:`Overall nutrition optimization concept model document <2021_concept_model_vivarium_nutrition_optimization>`

- :ref:`Pregnancy subcomponent concept model <2021_concept_model_vivarium_nutrition_optimization_pregnancies>`

.. _nutritionoptimizationchild2.0:

1.1 Modeling aims and objectives
---------------------------------

1.2 Outstanding questions and/or high-level to-dos
-------------------------------------------------------

**Outstanding questions/to-dos:**

- Determine how to handle the :ref:`wasting treatment propensity strategy as described here <WastingPropensityNote>` for the baseline scenario 

  - In short, the optimization protocol generally assumes that all interventions have the same propensity, although the child wasting treatment modeling strategy has a randomly generated propensity value upon each wasting transition. 

  - Note that this should only affect the baseline scenario as it is the only scenario in which wasting treatment coverage values will not equal zero or one.

**Notes/reminders:**

- We have chosen to exclude the "vicious cycle" feedback model from diarrheal diseases to child wasting in this simulation for the following reasons:

  - Inclusion of this effect would require "backing out" the direct effect of SQ-LNS on wasting exposure from the total effect of SQ-LNS on wasting exposure as mediated through the feedback cycle with diarrheal diseases as to not "double count" any effects of SQ-LNS on child wasting exposure.

  - This simulation model does not include any interventions that directly reduce diarrheal disease incidence rates, so it is not a pathway by which interventions primarily affect intervention outcomes.

- We have chosen to exclude the x-factor model of heterogeneity in wasting incidence rates calibrated to wasting treatment relapse data from this simulation for the following reasons:

  - This model made little difference in population-level intervention impact estimates when included in the CIFF project.

  - This model requires robust external calibration.

  - We are not considering any interventions that are directly targeted to the "x-factor." Instead, we will target interventions to a separate "target area" risk factor that will incorporate heterogeneity in wasting incidence rates. 

2.0 Model design
++++++++++++++++

2.1 Concept model diagram
-------------------------

.. image:: nutrition_optimization_child_concept_model.svg

2.2 Waves, GBD Rounds, and age groups
-------------------------------------

We will separate the implementation of the child model into two waves of updates. 
In addition to other differences detailed in the next section:

- Wave I will use GBD 2019 data, with the exception of using GBD 2021 data for child growth failure risk exposure and risk effects.

- Wave II will use GBD 2021 data for the entire model.

Notably, GBD 2021 uses different age groups than GBD 2019 (as summarized in the 
tables below). Therefore, the Wave I implementation that uses data from both GBD 
2019 and 2021 will require a hybrid approach that was used in the CIFF and wasting 
paper simulations. In this hybrid approach, the simulation uses GBD 2021 age groups 
for the entire simulation, but informs rates for these age groups from pooled 2019 
age groups for parameters other than child growth failure risk exposures and 
effects. For instance, cause model data for the 1-5 month and 6-11 month age groups 
in the simulation will be informed using data specific to the post neonatal age group from 2019.

.. list-table:: GBD 2019 age groups
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Age group
    - Age range
    - Age group ID
  * - early_neonatal
    - 0-6 days
    - 2
  * - late_neonatal
    - 7-28 days
    - 3
  * - post_neonatal
    - 28 days to 1 year
    - 4
  * - 1_to_4_years
    - 1 to 4 years
    - 5

.. list-table:: GBD 2021 age groups
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Age group
    - Age range
    - Age group ID
  * - early_neonatal
    - 0-6 days
    - 2
  * - late_neonatal
    - 7-28 days
    - 3
  * - 1-5_months
    - 1-5 months
    - 388
  * - 6-11_months
    - 6-11 months
    - 389
  * - 12_to_23_months
    - 12-23 months
    - 238
  * - 2_to_4_years
    - 2-4 years
    - 34


2.3 Submodels
-------------

.. list-table:: Risk exposure subcomponents
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Component
    - Existing version
    - Wave I update
    - Wave II update
    - Note
  * - LBWSG exposure
    - :ref:`2019 docs<2019_risk_exposure_lbwsg>`, implemented in IV iron
    - Artifact rebuild
    - 
    - 
  * - Child wasting exposure
    - :ref:`2020 docs<2020_risk_exposure_wasting_state_exposure>`, implemented in wasting paper
    - :ref:`Updated docs for children 6-59 months <2021_risk_exposure_wasting_state_exposure>`, use :ref:`static wasting exposure <2020_risk_exposure_static_wasting>` for children 0-6 months of age (as implemented in IV iron)
    - Include transitions for 0-6 months
    - (Does not require separate 2021 update)
  * - Child stunting exposure
    - :ref:`2020 docs<2020_risk_exposure_child_stunting>`, implemented in IV iron, wasting paper
    - Artifact rebuild
    - 
    - (Does not require separate 2021 update)
  * - Child underweight exposure
    - No
    - New :ref:`child underweight exposure model <2020_risk_exposure_child_underweight>`, still in progress
    - 
    - (Does not require separate 2021 update)
  * - Target area
    - No
    - N/A
    - Needs to be created!
    - 
 
.. list-table:: Risk effects subcomponents
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Risk
    - Affected outcome
    - Existing version
    - Wave I update
    - Wave II update
    - Note
  * - LBWSG
    - Mortality
    - :ref:`Docs here<2019_risk_effect_lbwsg>`, implemented in IV iron
    - 
    - Will need PAF calculation for GBD 2021
    - 
  * - LBWSG
    - Wasting
    - Yes, docs part of :ref:`antenatal supplementation intervention CGF effects <maternal_supplementation_intervention>`. Implemented in IV iron
    - Use "static child wasting" effects from birth through initialization into the 6-11 month age group only; then wasting exposure model updates to transition model
    - Update to transition wasting model 0-6m
    - 
  * - LBWSG
    - Stunting
    - Yes, docs part of :ref:`antenatal supplementation intervention CGF effects <maternal_supplementation_intervention>`, implemented in IV iron
    - 
    - 
    - 
  * - CGF (wasting, stunting, and underweight)
    - Infectious disease
    - Only wasting is documented :ref:`found here <2019_risk_effect_wasting>`. Docs need updating
    - Updated to 2021 values, added underweight risk effects, added malaria as affected outcome. :ref:`Updated version of CGF risk effects <2021_risk_effect_cgf>`
    - None
    - (Does not require separate 2021 update)
  * - Target area
    - CGF
    - No
    - N/A
    - Needs to be created
    - 

.. list-table:: Intervention subcomponents
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Intervention
    - Existing version
    - Wave I update
    - Wave II update
    - Note
  * - SAM tx
    - :ref:`Docs here <intervention_wasting_treatment>`, implemented in wasting paper
    - :ref:`Updated modeling strategy (combined protocol data) found here <intervention_wasting_tx_combined_protocol>`
    - 
    - 
  * - MAM tx
    - :ref:`Docs here <intervention_wasting_treatment>`, implemented in wasting paper
    - :ref:`Updated modeling strategy (combined protocol data) found here <intervention_wasting_tx_combined_protocol>`
    - 
    - 
  * - SQLNS
    - :ref:`Docs here <lipid_based_nutrient_supplements>`, implemented in wasting paper
    - Need to double check lognormal distribution for effects and change duration of supplementation
    - 
    - 

.. list-table:: Cause subcomponents
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Cause
    - Existing version
    - Wave I update
    - Wave II update
    - Note
  * - Diarrheal diseases
    - :ref:`Docs here <2019_cause_diarrhea>`, implemented in IV iron
    -  
    - 
    - 
  * - Measles
    - :ref:`Docs here <2019_cause_measles>`, implemented in IV iron
    - 
    - 
    - 
  * - Lower respiratory infections (LRI)
    - :ref:`Docs here <2019_cause_lower_respiratory_infections>`, implemented in IV iron
    - 
    - 
    - 
  * - Malaria
    - No existing version
    - :ref:`Docs here <2021_cause_malaria>`, was not included in IV iron
    - 
    - 
  * - Protein energy malnutrition (PEM)
    - :ref:`Old docs here <2020_risk_exposure_wasting_state_exposure>`, implemented in IV iron and CIFF
    - :ref:`New docs here <2021_pem>`. TODO: list whether or not there are updates other than breaking up docs pages
    - 
    - 
  * - Background morbidity
    - :ref:`Docs here <other_causes_ylds>`, but has not yet been implemented
    - 
    - 
    - Bonus model, not a high priority

2.3.1 Task tracking for each wave
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`A list of outstanding tasks for the child model (separated into wave I and wave II) can be found in this excel file in the "outstanding tasks" tab <https://uwnetid.sharepoint.com/:x:/r/sites/ihme_simulation_science_team/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7BB63E43A6-D0A8-482E-9AE2-5F8653F72818%7D&file=20230615_MNCH_Nutrition%20Optimization%20Timeline.xlsx&action=default&mobileredirect=true>`_

2.4 Default specifications
--------------------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Parameter
    - Value
    - Note
  * - Location(s)
    - Ethiopia (ID: 179)
    - Eventually will also add Nigeria (214) and Pakistan (164)
  * - Number of draws
    - Same as pregnancy sim output data
    - 
  * - Population size per draw
    - Same as pregnancy sim output data
    - 
  * - Cohort type
    - Closed
    - 
  * - Sex
    - Male and female
    - 
  * - Age start (initialization)
    - 0
    -
  * - Age start (observation)
    - 0
    - 
  * - Age end (initialization)
    - 0
    - All simulants initialized at birth
  * - Exit age (observation)
    - 5
    - years
  * - Simulation start date
    - 2025-01-01
    - All simulants enter simulation at the same time
  * - Simulation observation start date
    - 2025-01-01
    - 
  * - Simulation end date
    - 2029-12-31
    - 
  * - Timestep
    - 4 days
    - May eventually update to variable or 28 days with YLL/YLD-only modeling strategy (likely not for wave I)
  * - Randomness key columns
    - ['entrance_time', 'maternal_id']
    - Entrance time should be identical for all simulants despite simulants having different birth dates/times from the pregnancy simulation

.. _nutritionoptimizationchild4.0:

2.5 Simulation scenarios
------------------------

As of June, 2023, there are a total of 5 scenarios in the pregnancy simulation, :ref:`which can be found here <nutritionoptimizationpreg4.0>`. With the exception of the baseline scenario, all of the following child scenarios should be run on the outputs for each pregnancy scenario.

Wave I:

- 1 location

- Baseline scenario as well as scenarios 0 through 8

- Total number of scenarios = (5 pregnancy :math:`\times` 9 child :math:`+` 1 baseline) :math:`\times` 1 location :math:`=` **46 scenarios** 

Wave II:

- 3 locations

- Baseline scenario as well as scenarios 0 through 18

- Total number of scenarios = (5 pregnancy :math:`\times` 19 child :math:`+` 1 baseline) :math:`\times` 3 locations :math:`=` **288 scenarios** 

- It is possible we decide to exclude scenarios 13-18 from wave II, reducing the number of child scenarios from 19 to 13 and the total number of scenarios to 66/location for **198 scenarios**

.. list-table:: Child scenarios, implemented for each pregnancy scenario
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Pregnancy scenario
    - Child scenario
    - SAM tx coverage
    - MAM tx coverage
    - SQ-LNS coverage
  * - 0
    - Baseline
    - baseline
    - baseline
    - baseline (0)
  * - All
    - 0: Zero coverage
    - 0
    - 0
    - 0
  * - All
    - 1: SAM tx
    - 1
    - 0
    - 0
  * - All
    - 2: MAM tx
    - 0
    - 1
    - 0
  * - All
    - 3: SQ-LNS
    - 0
    - 0
    - 1
  * - All
    - 5: SAM and MAM
    - 1
    - 1
    - 0
  * - All
    - 6: SAM and SQLNS
    - 1
    - 0
    - 1
  * - All
    - 7: MAM and SQLNS
    - 0
    - 1
    - 1
  * - All
    - 8: All
    - 1
    - 1
    - 1
  * - All
    - 9: targeted SQLNS
    - 0
    - 0
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 10: targeted SQLNS and SAM
    - 1
    - 0
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 11: targeted SQLNS and MAM
    - 0
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 12: targeted SQLNS and SAM and MAM
    - 1
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 13: targeted MAM
    - 0
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 0
  * - All
    - 14: SAM and targeted MAM
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 0
  * - All
    - 15: SQLNS and targeted MAM
    - 0
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 1
  * - All
    - 16: SQLNS and SAM and targeted MAM
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 1
  * - All
    - 17: targeted MAM and targeted SQLNS
    - 0 
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 18: SAM plus targeted MAM and targeted SQLNS
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others

Where:

- **0** is zero coverage

- **baseline** is baseline coverage

- **1** is 100% coverage 

.. todo::

    Link relevant parameters for coverage (C_SAM, C_MAM, E_SAM, E_MAM, SQ-LNS cov)

2.6 Outputs
------------

.. todo::

  Include more info

2.7 Computational resource scoping
------------------------------------

Since this project requires running across many more scenarios than typical vivarium simulations, we ran some back-of-the-envelope calculations on the magnitude of computing resources to run all scenarios across all projects. The following assumptions went into these calculations:

- 46 scenarios in wave I (no targeting of SQLNS or MAM tx and 1 location) and 288 scenraios in wave II (including targeting of SQLNS and MAM treatment as well AND 3 locations)
- 4 day timestep in the child simulation if no "timestep inrease strategy" (such as variable timesteps or YLD/YLL-only modeling strategy) is implemented and 28 day timestep if we do implement one of these strategies
- Simulation takes 32 seconds per timestep. This assumption was informed by the "emulator test runs" of the wasting paper simulation that output only the necessary measures with no stratifications by year, age, or sex
- Assume 15,000 threads available on all.q

Under these assumptions, a full run of wave I will take 3.8 cluster-hours with 4-day timesteps and 0.6 cluster-hours with 28-day timesteps. A full run of wave II will take 23.5 cluster-hours with 4-day timesteps and 3.5 cluster-hours with 28-day timesteps.

:download:`Calculations of these estimated resource requirements can be found in this excel file <timestep scaling.xlsx>`

Notably, the run time of this simulation may increase as we add complexity to our model, particularly with respect to the additional risk factor of child underweight exposure and the additional cause model of malaria, which were not present in our test runs.


.. _nutritionoptimizationchild3.0:

3.0 Models
++++++++++

.. todo::

  Detail additional logical model builds with engineers, with the following in mind: https://blog.crisp.se/2016/01/25/henrikkniberg/making-sense-of-mvp

.. list-table:: Model run requests
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Run
    - Description
    - Pregnancy scenario(s)
    - Child scenario(s)
    - Spec. mods
    - Outputs
    - Note
  * - 
    -  
    - 
    - 
    - 
    - 
    - 

.. list-table:: Verification and validation tracking
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Model
    - V&V plan
    - V&V summary
  * - 
    - 
    - 

.. list-table:: Outstanding V&V issues
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Issue
    - Explanation
    - Action plan
    - Timeline
  * - 
    - 
    - 
    -

Commit message:

add note about magnitude of effects, as suggested by Abie

docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_nutrition_optimization/kids/concept_model.rst, after:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2021_concept_model_vivarium_nutrition_optimization_children:

===================================================
Nutrition Optimization Concept Model: CHILDREN
===================================================

.. contents::
  :local:

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This is the concept model document for the CHILD component of the Nutrition Optimization simulation model.
Documents that contain information specific to the overall model and the pregnancy subcomponent can be found here:

- :ref:`Overall nutrition optimization concept model document <2021_concept_model_vivarium_nutrition_optimization>`

- :ref:`Pregnancy subcomponent concept model <2021_concept_model_vivarium_nutrition_optimization_pregnancies>`

.. _nutritionoptimizationchild2.0:

1.1 Modeling aims and objectives
---------------------------------

1.2 Outstanding questions and/or high-level to-dos
-------------------------------------------------------

**Outstanding questions/to-dos:**

- Determine how to handle the :ref:`wasting treatment propensity strategy as described here <WastingPropensityNote>` for the baseline scenario 

  - In short, the optimization protocol generally assumes that all interventions have the same propensity, although the child wasting treatment modeling strategy has a randomly generated propensity value upon each wasting transition. 

  - Note that this should only affect the baseline scenario as it is the only scenario in which wasting treatment coverage values will not equal zero or one.

**Notes/reminders:**

- We have chosen to exclude the "vicious cycle" feedback model from diarrheal diseases to child wasting in this simulation for the following reasons:

  - Inclusion of this effect would require "backing out" the direct effect of SQ-LNS on wasting exposure from the total effect of SQ-LNS on wasting exposure as mediated through the feedback cycle with diarrheal diseases as to not "double count" any effects of SQ-LNS on child wasting exposure.

  - This simulation model does not include any interventions that directly reduce diarrheal disease incidence rates, so it is not a pathway by which interventions primarily affect intervention outcomes.

  - The impact of child wasting on diarrheal diseases *incidence* is relatively small in magnitude (the majority of the effect applies to diarrheal diseases *mortality*). Therefore, the effect of feedback loop between *incidence* of wasting and *incidence* of diarrhea is expected to be modest.

- We have chosen to exclude the x-factor model of heterogeneity in wasting incidence rates calibrated to wasting treatment relapse data from this simulation for the following reasons:

  - This model made little difference in population-level intervention impact estimates when included in the CIFF project.

  - This model requires robust external calibration.

  - We are not considering any interventions that are directly targeted to the "x-factor." Instead, we will target interventions to a separate "target area" risk factor that will incorporate heterogeneity in wasting incidence rates. 

2.0 Model design
++++++++++++++++

2.1 Concept model diagram
-------------------------

.. image:: nutrition_optimization_child_concept_model.svg

2.2 Waves, GBD Rounds, and age groups
-------------------------------------

We will separate the implementation of the child model into two waves of updates. 
In addition to other differences detailed in the next section:

- Wave I will use GBD 2019 data, with the exception of using GBD 2021 data for child growth failure risk exposure and risk effects.

- Wave II will use GBD 2021 data for the entire model.

Notably, GBD 2021 uses different age groups than GBD 2019 (as summarized in the 
tables below). Therefore, the Wave I implementation that uses data from both GBD 
2019 and 2021 will require a hybrid approach that was used in the CIFF and wasting 
paper simulations. In this hybrid approach, the simulation uses GBD 2021 age groups 
for the entire simulation, but informs rates for these age groups from pooled 2019 
age groups for parameters other than child growth failure risk exposures and 
effects. For instance, cause model data for the 1-5 month and 6-11 month age groups 
in the simulation will be informed using data specific to the post neonatal age group from 2019.

.. list-table:: GBD 2019 age groups
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Age group
    - Age range
    - Age group ID
  * - early_neonatal
    - 0-6 days
    - 2
  * - late_neonatal
    - 7-28 days
    - 3
  * - post_neonatal
    - 28 days to 1 year
    - 4
  * - 1_to_4_years
    - 1 to 4 years
    - 5

.. list-table:: GBD 2021 age groups
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Age group
    - Age range
    - Age group ID
  * - early_neonatal
    - 0-6 days
    - 2
  * - late_neonatal
    - 7-28 days
    - 3
  * - 1-5_months
    - 1-5 months
    - 388
  * - 6-11_months
    - 6-11 months
    - 389
  * - 12_to_23_months
    - 12-23 months
    - 238
  * - 2_to_4_years
    - 2-4 years
    - 34


2.3 Submodels
-------------

.. list-table:: Risk exposure subcomponents
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Component
    - Existing version
    - Wave I update
    - Wave II update
    - Note
  * - LBWSG exposure
    - :ref:`2019 docs<2019_risk_exposure_lbwsg>`, implemented in IV iron
    - Artifact rebuild
    - 
    - 
  * - Child wasting exposure
    - :ref:`2020 docs<2020_risk_exposure_wasting_state_exposure>`, implemented in wasting paper
    - :ref:`Updated docs for children 6-59 months <2021_risk_exposure_wasting_state_exposure>`, use :ref:`static wasting exposure <2020_risk_exposure_static_wasting>` for children 0-6 months of age (as implemented in IV iron)
    - Include transitions for 0-6 months
    - (Does not require separate 2021 update)
  * - Child stunting exposure
    - :ref:`2020 docs<2020_risk_exposure_child_stunting>`, implemented in IV iron, wasting paper
    - Artifact rebuild
    - 
    - (Does not require separate 2021 update)
  * - Child underweight exposure
    - No
    - New :ref:`child underweight exposure model <2020_risk_exposure_child_underweight>`, still in progress
    - 
    - (Does not require separate 2021 update)
  * - Target area
    - No
    - N/A
    - Needs to be created!
    - 
 
.. list-table:: Risk effects subcomponents
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Risk
    - Affected outcome
    - Existing version
    - Wave I update
    - Wave II update
    - Note
  * - LBWSG
    - Mortality
    - :ref:`Docs here<2019_risk_effect_lbwsg>`, implemented in IV iron
    - 
    - Will need PAF calculation for GBD 2021
    - 
  * - LBWSG
    - Wasting
    - Yes, docs part of :ref:`antenatal supplementation intervention CGF effects <maternal_supplementation_intervention>`. Implemented in IV iron
    - Use "static child wasting" effects from birth through initialization into the 6-11 month age group only; then wasting exposure model updates to transition model
    - Update to transition wasting model 0-6m
    - 
  * - LBWSG
    - Stunting
    - Yes, docs part of :ref:`antenatal supplementation intervention CGF effects <maternal_supplementation_intervention>`, implemented in IV iron
    - 
    - 
    - 
  * - CGF (wasting, stunting, and underweight)
    - Infectious disease
    - Only wasting is documented :ref:`found here <2019_risk_effect_wasting>`. Docs need updating
    - Updated to 2021 values, added underweight risk effects, added malaria as affected outcome. :ref:`Updated version of CGF risk effects <2021_risk_effect_cgf>`
    - None
    - (Does not require separate 2021 update)
  * - Target area
    - CGF
    - No
    - N/A
    - Needs to be created
    - 

.. list-table:: Intervention subcomponents
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Intervention
    - Existing version
    - Wave I update
    - Wave II update
    - Note
  * - SAM tx
    - :ref:`Docs here <intervention_wasting_treatment>`, implemented in wasting paper
    - :ref:`Updated modeling strategy (combined protocol data) found here <intervention_wasting_tx_combined_protocol>`
    - 
    - 
  * - MAM tx
    - :ref:`Docs here <intervention_wasting_treatment>`, implemented in wasting paper
    - :ref:`Updated modeling strategy (combined protocol data) found here <intervention_wasting_tx_combined_protocol>`
    - 
    - 
  * - SQLNS
    - :ref:`Docs here <lipid_based_nutrient_supplements>`, implemented in wasting paper
    - Need to double check lognormal distribution for effects and change duration of supplementation
    - 
    - 

.. list-table:: Cause subcomponents
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Cause
    - Existing version
    - Wave I update
    - Wave II update
    - Note
  * - Diarrheal diseases
    - :ref:`Docs here <2019_cause_diarrhea>`, implemented in IV iron
    -  
    - 
    - 
  * - Measles
    - :ref:`Docs here <2019_cause_measles>`, implemented in IV iron
    - 
    - 
    - 
  * - Lower respiratory infections (LRI)
    - :ref:`Docs here <2019_cause_lower_respiratory_infections>`, implemented in IV iron
    - 
    - 
    - 
  * - Malaria
    - No existing version
    - :ref:`Docs here <2021_cause_malaria>`, was not included in IV iron
    - 
    - 
  * - Protein energy malnutrition (PEM)
    - :ref:`Old docs here <2020_risk_exposure_wasting_state_exposure>`, implemented in IV iron and CIFF
    - :ref:`New docs here <2021_pem>`. TODO: list whether or not there are updates other than breaking up docs pages
    - 
    - 
  * - Background morbidity
    - :ref:`Docs here <other_causes_ylds>`, but has not yet been implemented
    - 
    - 
    - Bonus model, not a high priority

2.3.1 Task tracking for each wave
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`A list of outstanding tasks for the child model (separated into wave I and wave II) can be found in this excel file in the "outstanding tasks" tab <https://uwnetid.sharepoint.com/:x:/r/sites/ihme_simulation_science_team/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7BB63E43A6-D0A8-482E-9AE2-5F8653F72818%7D&file=20230615_MNCH_Nutrition%20Optimization%20Timeline.xlsx&action=default&mobileredirect=true>`_

2.4 Default specifications
--------------------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Parameter
    - Value
    - Note
  * - Location(s)
    - Ethiopia (ID: 179)
    - Eventually will also add Nigeria (214) and Pakistan (164)
  * - Number of draws
    - Same as pregnancy sim output data
    - 
  * - Population size per draw
    - Same as pregnancy sim output data
    - 
  * - Cohort type
    - Closed
    - 
  * - Sex
    - Male and female
    - 
  * - Age start (initialization)
    - 0
    -
  * - Age start (observation)
    - 0
    - 
  * - Age end (initialization)
    - 0
    - All simulants initialized at birth
  * - Exit age (observation)
    - 5
    - years
  * - Simulation start date
    - 2025-01-01
    - All simulants enter simulation at the same time
  * - Simulation observation start date
    - 2025-01-01
    - 
  * - Simulation end date
    - 2029-12-31
    - 
  * - Timestep
    - 4 days
    - May eventually update to variable or 28 days with YLL/YLD-only modeling strategy (likely not for wave I)
  * - Randomness key columns
    - ['entrance_time', 'maternal_id']
    - Entrance time should be identical for all simulants despite simulants having different birth dates/times from the pregnancy simulation

.. _nutritionoptimizationchild4.0:

2.5 Simulation scenarios
------------------------

As of June, 2023, there are a total of 5 scenarios in the pregnancy simulation, :ref:`which can be found here <nutritionoptimizationpreg4.0>`. With the exception of the baseline scenario, all of the following child scenarios should be run on the outputs for each pregnancy scenario.

Wave I:

- 1 location

- Baseline scenario as well as scenarios 0 through 8

- Total number of scenarios = (5 pregnancy :math:`\times` 9 child :math:`+` 1 baseline) :math:`\times` 1 location :math:`=` **46 scenarios** 

Wave II:

- 3 locations

- Baseline scenario as well as scenarios 0 through 18

- Total number of scenarios = (5 pregnancy :math:`\times` 19 child :math:`+` 1 baseline) :math:`\times` 3 locations :math:`=` **288 scenarios** 

- It is possible we decide to exclude scenarios 13-18 from wave II, reducing the number of child scenarios from 19 to 13 and the total number of scenarios to 66/location for **198 scenarios**

.. list-table:: Child scenarios, implemented for each pregnancy scenario
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Pregnancy scenario
    - Child scenario
    - SAM tx coverage
    - MAM tx coverage
    - SQ-LNS coverage
  * - 0
    - Baseline
    - baseline
    - baseline
    - baseline (0)
  * - All
    - 0: Zero coverage
    - 0
    - 0
    - 0
  * - All
    - 1: SAM tx
    - 1
    - 0
    - 0
  * - All
    - 2: MAM tx
    - 0
    - 1
    - 0
  * - All
    - 3: SQ-LNS
    - 0
    - 0
    - 1
  * - All
    - 5: SAM and MAM
    - 1
    - 1
    - 0
  * - All
    - 6: SAM and SQLNS
    - 1
    - 0
    - 1
  * - All
    - 7: MAM and SQLNS
    - 0
    - 1
    - 1
  * - All
    - 8: All
    - 1
    - 1
    - 1
  * - All
    - 9: targeted SQLNS
    - 0
    - 0
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 10: targeted SQLNS and SAM
    - 1
    - 0
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 11: targeted SQLNS and MAM
    - 0
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 12: targeted SQLNS and SAM and MAM
    - 1
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 13: targeted MAM
    - 0
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 0
  * - All
    - 14: SAM and targeted MAM
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 0
  * - All
    - 15: SQLNS and targeted MAM
    - 0
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 1
  * - All
    - 16: SQLNS and SAM and targeted MAM
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 1
  * - All
    - 17: targeted MAM and targeted SQLNS
    - 0 
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
  * - All
    - 18: SAM plus targeted MAM and targeted SQLNS
    - 1
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others
    - 1 for target group; 0 for others

Where:

- **0** is zero coverage

- **baseline** is baseline coverage

- **1** is 100% coverage 

.. todo::

    Link relevant parameters for coverage (C_SAM, C_MAM, E_SAM, E_MAM, SQ-LNS cov)

2.6 Outputs
------------

.. todo::

  Include more info

2.7 Computational resource scoping
------------------------------------

Since this project requires running across many more scenarios than typical vivarium simulations, we ran some back-of-the-envelope calculations on the magnitude of computing resources to run all scenarios across all projects. The following assumptions went into these calculations:

- 46 scenarios in wave I (no targeting of SQLNS or MAM tx and 1 location) and 288 scenraios in wave II (including targeting of SQLNS and MAM treatment as well AND 3 locations)
- 4 day timestep in the child simulation if no "timestep inrease strategy" (such as variable timesteps or YLD/YLL-only modeling strategy) is implemented and 28 day timestep if we do implement one of these strategies
- Simulation takes 32 seconds per timestep. This assumption was informed by the "emulator test runs" of the wasting paper simulation that output only the necessary measures with no stratifications by year, age, or sex
- Assume 15,000 threads available on all.q

Under these assumptions, a full run of wave I will take 3.8 cluster-hours with 4-day timesteps and 0.6 cluster-hours with 28-day timesteps. A full run of wave II will take 23.5 cluster-hours with 4-day timesteps and 3.5 cluster-hours with 28-day timesteps.

:download:`Calculations of these estimated resource requirements can be found in this excel file <timestep scaling.xlsx>`

Notably, the run time of this simulation may increase as we add complexity to our model, particularly with respect to the additional risk factor of child underweight exposure and the additional cause model of malaria, which were not present in our test runs.


.. _nutritionoptimizationchild3.0:

3.0 Models
++++++++++

.. todo::

  Detail additional logical model builds with engineers, with the following in mind: https://blog.crisp.se/2016/01/25/henrikkniberg/making-sense-of-mvp

.. list-table:: Model run requests
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Run
    - Description
    - Pregnancy scenario(s)
    - Child scenario(s)
    - Spec. mods
    - Outputs
    - Note
  * - 
    -  
    - 
    - 
    - 
    - 
    - 

.. list-table:: Verification and validation tracking
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Model
    - V&V plan
    - V&V summary
  * - 
    - 
    - 

.. list-table:: Outstanding V&V issues
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Issue
    - Explanation
    - Action plan
    - Timeline
  * - 
    - 
    - 
    -
