docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_mncnh_portfolio/facility_choice_module/module_document.rst, before:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_facility_choice_module:

======================================
Facility choice module
======================================

.. contents::
  :local:
  :depth: 2

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This module uses the delivery facility propensity (an output from the initial attributes model that is correlated with propensity values for ANC attendance and LBWSG exposure) as well as believed gestational age to assign a delivery facility exposure in the intrapartum component of the simulation. 

2.0 Module Diagram and Data
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

There is a significant amount of background research and analysis that has gone into the facility choice model, which is detailed on the :ref:`facility choice model document <2024_facility_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`. The information on this page highlights the necessary information for implementation only, with module inputs and outputs described in the tables below.

.. list-table:: Module required inputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Input
    - Source module
    - Application
    - Note
  * - In-facility delivery (IFD) propensity value
    - :ref:`Initial attributes module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_initial_attributes_module>`
    - Used to determine home birth exposure by comparing to the
      :ref:`causal conditional probabilities for in-facility delivery
      <facility_choice_causal_probabilities_section>`. Note that
      ordering of the delivery facility categories is important when
      sampling using this propensity: See the :ref:`special ordering of
      the categories
      <facility_choice_special_ordering_of_categories_section>` section
      of the facility choice model document.
    - 
  * - Believed preterm status
    - :ref:`AI ultrasound module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_ai_ultrasound_module>`
    - Determines which :ref:`causal conditional probabilities for
      in-facility delivery
      <facility_choice_causal_probabilities_section>` to use, either the
      "believed preterm" values or the "believed term" values. Note that
      the believed preterm status is *believed preterm* if the estimated
      gestational age is <37 weeks and is *believed term* if the
      estimated gestational age is 37+ weeks.
    -

..
      Determines which delivery facility probability values to use
      (values found in the "Conditional delivery facility probabilities"
      section of the :ref:`facility choice model document
      <2024_facility_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`). If <37 weeks,
      use believed preterm values. If 37+ weeks use the believed term
      values.


.. list-table:: Module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Output
    - Value
    - Instructions
    - Note
  * - A. IFD status
    - *at-home* / *in-facility*
    - Use IFD propensity and believed preterm status
      input values to assign IFD status as described in
      the "Application" column of the module input table above
    -
  * - B. Delivery facility
    - *home* / *BEmONC* / *CEmONC*
    - Location where the simulant delivers their baby. Assign *home* if
      IFD status is *at-home*. If IFD status is *in-facility*, assign
      BEmONC or CEmONC according to the probabilities specified in the
      :ref:`choosing BEmONC vs. CEmONC section
      <facility_choice_choosing_bemonc_cemonc_section>` of the facility
      choice model document.
    -


3.0 Assumptions and limitations
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

See the :ref:`facility choice model document <2024_facility_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`.

Additionally, we do not currently consider facility transfers, and think of the delivery facility as the *last* location in a delivery where there were transfers between facilities.

4.0 Verification and Validation Criteria
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

* Delivery facility exposure distribution stratified by believed-preterm status should match expectations.

5.0 References
+++++++++++++++

Commit message:

use Note column in tables

docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_mncnh_portfolio/facility_choice_module/module_document.rst, after:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_facility_choice_module:

======================================
Facility choice module
======================================

.. contents::
  :local:
  :depth: 2

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This module uses the delivery facility propensity (an output from the initial attributes model that is correlated with propensity values for ANC attendance and LBWSG exposure) as well as believed gestational age to assign a delivery facility exposure in the intrapartum component of the simulation. 

2.0 Module Diagram and Data
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

There is a significant amount of background research and analysis that has gone into the facility choice model, which is detailed on the :ref:`facility choice model document <2024_facility_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`. The information on this page highlights the necessary information for implementation only, with module inputs and outputs described in the tables below.

.. list-table:: Module required inputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Input
    - Source module
    - Application
    - Note
  * - In-facility delivery (IFD) propensity value
    - :ref:`Initial attributes module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_initial_attributes_module>`
    - Used to determine home birth exposure by comparing to the
      :ref:`causal conditional probabilities for in-facility delivery
      <facility_choice_causal_probabilities_section>`
    - The ordering of IFD categories (*at-home* < *in-facility*) is
      important when sampling using this propensity. See :ref:`Special
      ordering of the categories
      <facility_choice_special_ordering_of_categories_section>` in the
      facility choice model document
  * - Believed preterm status
    - :ref:`AI ultrasound module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_ai_ultrasound_module>`
    - Determines which :ref:`causal conditional probabilities for
      in-facility delivery
      <facility_choice_causal_probabilities_section>` to use, either the
      "believed preterm" values or the "believed term" values
    - Believed preterm status is *believed preterm* if the estimated
      gestational age is <37 weeks and is *believed term* if the
      estimated gestational age is 37+ weeks

.. list-table:: Module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Output
    - Value
    - Instructions
    - Note
  * - A. IFD status
    - *at-home* / *in-facility*
    - Use IFD propensity and believed preterm status to assign IFD
      status as described in the "Application" column of the module
      input table above
    -
  * - B. Delivery facility
    - *home* / *BEmONC* / *CEmONC*
    - Assign *home* if IFD status is *at-home*. If IFD status is
      *in-facility*, assign BEmONC or CEmONC according to the
      probabilities specified in the :ref:`choosing BEmONC vs. CEmONC
      section <facility_choice_choosing_bemonc_cemonc_section>` of the
      facility choice model document.
    - Location where the simulant delivers their baby


3.0 Assumptions and limitations
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

See the :ref:`facility choice model document <2024_facility_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`.

Additionally, we do not currently consider facility transfers, and think of the delivery facility as the *last* location in a delivery where there were transfers between facilities.

4.0 Verification and Validation Criteria
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

* Delivery facility exposure distribution stratified by believed-preterm status should match expectations.

5.0 References
+++++++++++++++
