docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_mncnh_portfolio/initial_attributes_module/module_document.rst, before:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_initial_attributes_module:

======================================
Initial attributes Module
======================================

.. contents::
  :local:
  :depth: 2

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This module assigns initial simulant attributes.

2.0 Module Diagram and Data
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

There is no need for a diagram for the initial attributes module of this simulation. Eventually, it is expected that we will assign correlated propensity values for ANC attendance, facility choice, and LBWSG exposure. However, that has not yet been implemented or documented. 

.. todo::

  Fill this section in accordingly

.. list-table:: Module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Output
    - Value
    - Dependencies
  * - A. 
    - 
    - 
  * - B.
    - 
    - 


3.0 Assumptions and limitations
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

.. todo::

  List module assumptions and limitations

4.0 Verification and Validation Criteria
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

.. todo::
  
  List module V&V criteria

5.0 References
+++++++++++++++

Commit message:

Integrate facility choice docs into concept model

docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_mncnh_portfolio/initial_attributes_module/module_document.rst, after:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_initial_attributes_module:

======================================
Initial attributes Module
======================================

.. contents::
  :local:
  :depth: 2

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This module assigns initial simulant attributes.

2.0 Module Diagram and Data
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

There is no need for a diagram for the initial attributes module of this simulation. Rather, a list of module outputs and instructions for how to apply them are included in the table below.

.. list-table:: Module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Output
    - Value
    - Dependencies
  * - A. ANC propensity
    - See the Correlated Propensities section of the facility choice model document for instructions
    - Will be used to determine ANC attendance in ANC module
  * - B. LWBSG propensity
    - See the Correlated Propensities section of the facility choice model document for instructions
    - Will be used to determine LBWSG exposure in pregnancy module
  * - C. Facility choice propensity
    - See the Correlated Propensities section of the facility choice model document for instructions
    - Will be used to determine facility choice in facility choice module

3.0 Assumptions and limitations
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

.. todo::

  List module assumptions and limitations

4.0 Verification and Validation Criteria
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

.. todo::
  
  List module V&V criteria

5.0 References
+++++++++++++++
