docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_mncnh_portfolio/anemia_component/module_document.rst, before:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_anemia_module:

======================================
Anemia Module
======================================

.. contents::
  :local:
  :depth: 2

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This document is the page for the anemia YLDs module of the MNCNH Portfolio simulation.
The anemia module will process information related to simulants' hemoglobin exposure
throughtout the course of the simulation and calculate corresponding anemia exposure
and YLDs.

2.0 Module Diagram and Data
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

2.1 Module Diagram
----------------------

.. image:: anemia_ylds_module_diagram.png

2.2 Module Inputs
---------------------

.. list-table:: Hemoglobin module required inputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Input
    - Source module
    - Application
    - Note
  * - First trimester ANC attendance 
    - :ref:`ANC module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_anc_module>`
    - Determines anemia YLD calculation equation
    - 
  * - Hemoglobin at the start of pregnancy
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
    - Used to calculate anemia YLDs
    - 
  * - Hemoglobin at birth
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
    - Used to calculate anemia YLDs
    - 
  * - Postpartum hemoglobin
    - :ref:`Postpartum hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_postpartum_hemoglobin>`
    - Used to calculate anemia YLDs
    - Note that this value will be missing for simulants who did not survive labor
  * - IV iron coverage
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
    - Determines anemia YLD calculation equation
    - 
  * - IFA/MMS coverage
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
    - Determines anemia YLD calculation equation
    - 
  * - Pregnancy duration
    - :ref:`Pregnancy II module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_pregnancy_module>`
    - Used to calculate anemia YLDs
    - 

2.3 Module Decision Nodes
-----------------------------

.. list-table:: Hemoglobin module decision nodes
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Decision node
    - Description
    - Information
    - Note
  * - 1
    - Received IFA/MMS?
    - Yes if IFA/MMS coverage input value == True
    - 
  * - 2, 4, 5
    - Received IV iron
    - Yes if IV iron coverage input value == True
    - 
  * - 3
    - Attended first trimester ANC visit
    - Yes if first trimester ANC attendance input value == True
    - 

2.4 Module Action Points
---------------------------

We assume that hemoglobin may vary throughout the course of pregnancy/postpartum at the following distinct points opportunities: (1) following IFA/MMS supplementation at the first trimester ANC visit, (2) following IFA/MMS supplementation or IV iron administration at the later pregnancy ANC visit, and (3) following an incident case of maternal hemorrhage during labor, which will persist through the end of the postpartum period. Therefore, we will calculate YLDs due to anemia during pregnancy in this model as a weighted sum over the course of pregnancy stratified by these specified events.

Note that simulants who died during labor should not experience any YLDs due to anemia in the postpartum period. In other words, :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp} = 0` for these simulants.

.. list-table:: Hemoglobin module action point
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Equation
    - Value
    - Note
  * - I
    - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{preg}_i + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp}` 
    - No interventions in pregnancy
  * - II
    - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i) * T^\text{first trimester}_i + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{birth}_i) * (\text{duration}^\text{preg}_i - T^\text{first trimester}_i) + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp}` 
    - Received IFA/MMS and/or IV iron at later pregnancy visit
  * - III
    - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i) * T^\text{later pregnancy}_i + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{birth}_i) * (\text{duration}^\text{preg}_i - T^\text{later pregnancy}_i) + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp}` 
    - Received IFA/MMS at first trimester visit, no IV iron
  * - IV
    - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i) * T^\text{first trimester}_i + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i + \text{shift}^\text{IFA/MMS}) * (T^\text{later pregnancy}_i - T^\text{first trimester}_i) + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{birth}_i) * (\text{duration}^\text{preg}_i - T^\text{later pregnancy}_i) + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp}` 
    - Received IFA/MMS at first trimester visit, IV iron at later pregnancy visit

.. list-table:: Parameters
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Parameter
    - Value
    - Source/Note
  * - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb})`
    - Function that returns the anemia disability weight for a given hemoglobin level
    - See the :ref:`anemia impairment document<2019_anemia_impairment>` for anemia hemoglobin thresholds (use the pregnancy-specific values) and disability weights
  * - :math:`\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i`
    - Hemoglobin exposure at the start of pregnancy for individual simulant
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
  * - :math:`\text{hgb}^\text{birth}_i`
    - Hemoglobin exposure at birth for individual simulant
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
  * - :math:`\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i`
    - Postpartum hemoglobin for individual simulant
    - :ref:`Postpartum hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_postpartum_hemoglobin>`
  * - :math:`\text{duration}^\text{preg}_i`
    - Pregnancy duration in years for individual simulant
    - :ref:`Pregnancy II module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_pregnancy_module>`, note a unit conversion to years may be necessary
  * - :math:`\text{duration}_\text{pp}`
    - 6 * 7 / 365.25
    - We track six weeks of postpartum anemia YLDs
  * - :math:`\text{shift}_\text{IFA/MMS}`
    - Effect of IFA/MMS on hemoglobin
    - :ref:`Oral iron supplementation intervention (IFA/MMS) <maternal_supplementation_intervention>`
  * - :math:`T^\text{first trimester}_i`
    - Uniform distribution between 8/52 and 12/52 (8 to 12 weeks, represented as a fraction of a year)
    - Randomly sample a different value for each simulant
  * - :math:`T^\text{later pregnancy}_i`
    - Uniform distribution between 12/52 and :math:`\text{duration}^\text{pregnancy}_i - 2/52` 
    - Randomly sample a different value for each simulant

2.4: Module Outputs
-----------------------

.. list-table:: Hemoglobin module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Output
    - Value
    - Dependencies
  * - A. Anemia YLDs
    - Point value
    - Simulation result

3.0 Assumptions and limitations
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

- We assume that first trimester ANC visits occur uniformly between 8 weeks (earliest appointments) and 12 weeks (end of first trimester) of gestation
- We assume that later pregnancy ANC visits occur uniformly between 12 weeks (end of first trimester) and two weeks prior to the time of birth
- We assume that interventions affect anemia YLDs at the time of administration at ANC (as according to the timed assumptions in the two prior bullets) with no additional delay 
- We only track anemia YLDs for six weeks postpartum

4.0 Verification and Validation Criteria
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

- Baseline simulated anemia YLDs should match corresponding pregnancy-specific GBD values (see the 'Pregnancy-specific anemia prevalence and YLD in GBD 2023' section of `this notebook <https://github.com/ihmeuw/vivarium_research_mncnh_portfolio/blob/main/data_prep/gbd_data_pulling.ipynb>`_ in the research repo for how to pull these data.
  Note: you need to make sure you have the latest version of db_queries to use the ``population_group_id=16`` argument in the get_outputs() call.)

5.0 References
+++++++++++++++

Commit message:

Update with actual command used

docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_mncnh_portfolio/anemia_component/module_document.rst, after:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_anemia_module:

======================================
Anemia Module
======================================

.. contents::
  :local:
  :depth: 2

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This document is the page for the anemia YLDs module of the MNCNH Portfolio simulation.
The anemia module will process information related to simulants' hemoglobin exposure
throughtout the course of the simulation and calculate corresponding anemia exposure
and YLDs.

2.0 Module Diagram and Data
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

2.1 Module Diagram
----------------------

.. image:: anemia_ylds_module_diagram.png

2.2 Module Inputs
---------------------

.. list-table:: Hemoglobin module required inputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Input
    - Source module
    - Application
    - Note
  * - First trimester ANC attendance 
    - :ref:`ANC module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_anc_module>`
    - Determines anemia YLD calculation equation
    - 
  * - Hemoglobin at the start of pregnancy
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
    - Used to calculate anemia YLDs
    - 
  * - Hemoglobin at birth
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
    - Used to calculate anemia YLDs
    - 
  * - Postpartum hemoglobin
    - :ref:`Postpartum hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_postpartum_hemoglobin>`
    - Used to calculate anemia YLDs
    - Note that this value will be missing for simulants who did not survive labor
  * - IV iron coverage
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
    - Determines anemia YLD calculation equation
    - 
  * - IFA/MMS coverage
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
    - Determines anemia YLD calculation equation
    - 
  * - Pregnancy duration
    - :ref:`Pregnancy II module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_pregnancy_module>`
    - Used to calculate anemia YLDs
    - 

2.3 Module Decision Nodes
-----------------------------

.. list-table:: Hemoglobin module decision nodes
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Decision node
    - Description
    - Information
    - Note
  * - 1
    - Received IFA/MMS?
    - Yes if IFA/MMS coverage input value == True
    - 
  * - 2, 4, 5
    - Received IV iron
    - Yes if IV iron coverage input value == True
    - 
  * - 3
    - Attended first trimester ANC visit
    - Yes if first trimester ANC attendance input value == True
    - 

2.4 Module Action Points
---------------------------

We assume that hemoglobin may vary throughout the course of pregnancy/postpartum at the following distinct points opportunities: (1) following IFA/MMS supplementation at the first trimester ANC visit, (2) following IFA/MMS supplementation or IV iron administration at the later pregnancy ANC visit, and (3) following an incident case of maternal hemorrhage during labor, which will persist through the end of the postpartum period. Therefore, we will calculate YLDs due to anemia during pregnancy in this model as a weighted sum over the course of pregnancy stratified by these specified events.

Note that simulants who died during labor should not experience any YLDs due to anemia in the postpartum period. In other words, :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp} = 0` for these simulants.

.. list-table:: Hemoglobin module action point
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Equation
    - Value
    - Note
  * - I
    - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{preg}_i + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp}` 
    - No interventions in pregnancy
  * - II
    - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i) * T^\text{first trimester}_i + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{birth}_i) * (\text{duration}^\text{preg}_i - T^\text{first trimester}_i) + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp}` 
    - Received IFA/MMS and/or IV iron at later pregnancy visit
  * - III
    - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i) * T^\text{later pregnancy}_i + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{birth}_i) * (\text{duration}^\text{preg}_i - T^\text{later pregnancy}_i) + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp}` 
    - Received IFA/MMS at first trimester visit, no IV iron
  * - IV
    - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i) * T^\text{first trimester}_i + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i + \text{shift}^\text{IFA/MMS}) * (T^\text{later pregnancy}_i - T^\text{first trimester}_i) + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{birth}_i) * (\text{duration}^\text{preg}_i - T^\text{later pregnancy}_i) + \text{DW}(\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i) * \text{duration}^\text{pp}` 
    - Received IFA/MMS at first trimester visit, IV iron at later pregnancy visit

.. list-table:: Parameters
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Parameter
    - Value
    - Source/Note
  * - :math:`\text{DW}(\text{hgb})`
    - Function that returns the anemia disability weight for a given hemoglobin level
    - See the :ref:`anemia impairment document<2019_anemia_impairment>` for anemia hemoglobin thresholds (use the pregnancy-specific values) and disability weights
  * - :math:`\text{hgb}^\text{start}_i`
    - Hemoglobin exposure at the start of pregnancy for individual simulant
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
  * - :math:`\text{hgb}^\text{birth}_i`
    - Hemoglobin exposure at birth for individual simulant
    - :ref:`Hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_hemoglobin_module>`
  * - :math:`\text{hgb}^\text{pp}_i`
    - Postpartum hemoglobin for individual simulant
    - :ref:`Postpartum hemoglobin module<2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_postpartum_hemoglobin>`
  * - :math:`\text{duration}^\text{preg}_i`
    - Pregnancy duration in years for individual simulant
    - :ref:`Pregnancy II module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_pregnancy_module>`, note a unit conversion to years may be necessary
  * - :math:`\text{duration}_\text{pp}`
    - 6 * 7 / 365.25
    - We track six weeks of postpartum anemia YLDs
  * - :math:`\text{shift}_\text{IFA/MMS}`
    - Effect of IFA/MMS on hemoglobin
    - :ref:`Oral iron supplementation intervention (IFA/MMS) <maternal_supplementation_intervention>`
  * - :math:`T^\text{first trimester}_i`
    - Uniform distribution between 8/52 and 12/52 (8 to 12 weeks, represented as a fraction of a year)
    - Randomly sample a different value for each simulant
  * - :math:`T^\text{later pregnancy}_i`
    - Uniform distribution between 12/52 and :math:`\text{duration}^\text{pregnancy}_i - 2/52` 
    - Randomly sample a different value for each simulant

2.4: Module Outputs
-----------------------

.. list-table:: Hemoglobin module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Output
    - Value
    - Dependencies
  * - A. Anemia YLDs
    - Point value
    - Simulation result

3.0 Assumptions and limitations
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

- We assume that first trimester ANC visits occur uniformly between 8 weeks (earliest appointments) and 12 weeks (end of first trimester) of gestation
- We assume that later pregnancy ANC visits occur uniformly between 12 weeks (end of first trimester) and two weeks prior to the time of birth
- We assume that interventions affect anemia YLDs at the time of administration at ANC (as according to the timed assumptions in the two prior bullets) with no additional delay 
- We only track anemia YLDs for six weeks postpartum

4.0 Verification and Validation Criteria
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

- Baseline simulated anemia YLDs should match corresponding pregnancy-specific GBD values. Run the following command to load the data from GBD 2023:

.. code-block:: python

   get_outputs(
       location_id=[165,179,214],
       topic='rei',
       rei_id=[206,206,207], # We also have rei_id=192 for all anemia and rei_id=432 for moderate and severe combined
       population_group_id=16,
       sex_id=2,
       year_id=2023,
       release_id=33,
       compare_version_id=8306,
       measure_id=[3,5],
       age_group_id=[7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 24, 169]
   )

.. note::

   Make sure you have the latest version of ``db_queries`` to be able to use the ``population_group_id`` argument. To get pregnancy-specific results, the population group and the age groups need to be specified, because the default is all ages.
   As of the time of writing (July 2025), we can only use ``population_group_id=16`` with ``get_outputs()``. There were a few EPIC/COMO runs with pregnancy this GBD round, which are noted in the `tracking HUB page <https://hub.ihme.washington.edu/spaces/GBDdirectory/pages/229280352/GBD+2023+EPIC+COMO+tracking>`_.


5.0 References
+++++++++++++++
