docs/source/model_design/vivarium_features/other_causes_ylds/index.rst, before:

..
  Section title decorators for this document:
  
  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============
  Section Level 1
  ---------------
  Section Level 2
  +++++++++++++++
  Section Level 3
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _other_causes_ylds:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

=========================================================
YLDs due to other causes
=========================================================

Years lived with disability (YLDs) are an important measure of health loss and 
contribute to estimates of disability adjusted life years (DALYs) in our model. 
This document discusses how YLDs are tracked in vivarium by default, how that 
compares to GBD methodology, and discusses potential improvements to this 
default behavior.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Background and Motivation
--------------------------

GBD methodology
++++++++++++++++

Disability weight estimation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The GBD study relies on disability weights (DWs) to estimate years lived with 
disability (YLDs). DWs represent the magnitude of health loss associated with a 
specific health outcome and are measured on a scale from 0 to 1; 0 implies a 
state equivalent to full health and 1 equivalent to death.

Disability weights have been estimated through a series of surveys, described 
in detail in the GBD methods appendix along with a complete listing of 
disability weight values for all health states included in the GBD study.

Comorbidity correction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The disability weights estimated through the process described above consider
each health state individually and must be corrected for the simultaneous 
presence of multiple disability-causing health states within a given 
individual. This correction accounts for the assumption that disability weights 
from comorbid conditions scale multiplicatively rather than additively. So in 
effect, the reduction in health due to a newly acquired cause of disability is 
quantified as greater for an individual who was previously in perfect health 
than for an individual who was already subject to some non-zero baseline level 
of morbidity.

The COMO process in GBD assumes total independence between health states and
does not account for any correlation that may exist between related health 
states (beyond correlation induced by location, age, and sex, which is 
accounted for through its stratified adjustments). As reported in the GBD 2019 
methods appendix, "[GBD] tested the contribution of dependent and independent 
comorbidity in the US MEPS data and found that 
**independent comorbidity was the dominant factor** even though well-known 
examples of dependent comorbidity exist, such as clustering of conditions 
like diabetes and stroke or anxiety and alcohol use disorders" (p. 475).

The GBD study performs this comorbidity correction (termed "COMO") 
using a microsimulation, described below. The microsimulation is performed at 
the age-, sex-, location-, and 
year-specific level. For GBD 2019, the population size of each microsimulation 
was 40,000. In this microsimulation, each simulant is exposed to an independent 
probability of having any of the sequelae including in GBD using the estimated 
sequela prevalence.

.. note::

  The COMO adjustment is run and maintained by IHME central computation. `The 
  repository can be found here (as of May, 2023) <https://stash.ihme.washington.edu/projects/CCGMAC/repos/como/browse>`_.

  According to correspondence with a central computation representative: the COMO
  adjustment ensures that no simulant may simultaneously possess mutually exclusive
  sequelae (mild AND moderate diarrhea, for instance), nor may they simultaneously
  possess mutually exclusive impairments (such as mild AND moderate anemia). A 
  simulant may, however, simultaneously possess more than one sequelae that correspond
  to the same healthstate (for example: the sequelae ectopic pregnancy and intestinal 
  perforation due to paratyphoid, which are both included in the abdominopelvic problem 
  healthstate. In this case, an individual who simultaneously possesses both of these 
  sequelae that share the same health state, the individual will in effect experience 
  the abdominopelvic problem healthstate as approximately twice as severe than if they 
  only possessed a one of these sequelae). 

    Note, a list of GBD sequelae and healthstate pairs can be obtained with the 
    :code:`db_queries.get_sequela_metadata()` shared function.

  Additionally, the COMO adjustment handles exceptions for impairments as well as 
  certain GBD causes (including injuries, sexual violence, and "residual" causes,
  epilepsy, and intellectual disability) for which DWs are estimated through separate, 
  custom processes.

  The COMO adjustment also handles aggregation of cause prevalence and incidence
  up the GBD cause hierarchy. In this process, some sub-causes of a parent cause assumed to 
  be independent (and scale multiplicatively) and others assumed to be mutually exclusive
  (and scale additively).

Once this population has been initialized, the comorbidity correction is 
performed as follows:

For each simulant, the overall disability weight is calculated as the 
multiplicative combination of each of the sequela that the simulant possesses 
according to the following equation:

.. math::

  DW_\text{overall} = 1 - \prod_{k=i}^j (1 - DW_k)

Where: :math:`DW_k` is the disability weight for the :math:`k`-*th* disease 
sequelae that the simulant possesses.

Once this overall disability weight is computed for each individual simulant, 
it is then disaggregated into its component parts once more to obtain 
cause-specific disability weights adjusted for comorbidity according to the 
following formula:

.. math::

  ADW_k = \frac{DW_k}{\sum_{k=i}^j DW_k} \times DW_\text{overall}

Where: :math:`ADW_k` is the comorbidity-adjusted disability weight for sequela 
:math:`k` among a given simulant.

Then, cause-specific YLDs per capita in an age-sex-location-year are computed 
as the sum of the adjusted DWs for each sequela across all *n* simulants in the 
microsimulation as:

.. math::
  
  \text{YLD rate}_k = \frac{\sum_{simulant=1}^n ADW_k}{n}

The implication of the COMO adjustment for GBD YLDs attributable to a parent 
cause should be exactly equal to the sum of YLDs attributed to each of its 
sub-causes. Additionally, the YLDs attributable to a given sequela after the 
COMO adjustment will be less than the product of the disability weight and the 
prevalence for that sequela.

Historical behavior in vivarium
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

For a given vivarium simulation, we have typically developed individual cause 
models for specific conditions. Conditions to include in a simulation are 
selected based on relevance to the research question and are not exhaustive of 
all conditions modeled in GBD. This poses a question of how to handle morbidity 
and mortality due to causes not explicitly modeled within our simulation 
("background" causes). Historically, vivarium has handled background morbidity 
differently from background mortality, as described below.

Background mortality
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Vivarium automatically models background mortality in addition to mortality due 
to modeled causes as mortality due to :code:`other_causes`. The cause-specific 
mortality rate of :code:`other_causes` is equal to:

.. math::

  CSMR_\text{other causes} = ACMR - \sum_{c=i}^n CSMR_c

Where: :math:`ACMR` is the all-cause mortality rate and :math:`CSMR_c` is the 
cause-specific mortality rate of a modeled cause :math:`c`.

Background morbidity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Historically, vivarium has **not** modeled background morbidity. Rather, by 
default, vivarium models morbidity due to modeled causes only. Among the 
modeled causes, a partial comorbidity adjustment is performed.

Specifically, for a simulant that possesses multiple causes of disability 
simultaneously, the YLDs accrued for that simulant in a given timestep are 
equal to:

.. math::

  YLDs_\text{all causes} = (1 - \prod_{c=i}^n (1 - DW_c)) * \text{time step scalar}

.. math::

  YLDs_\text{cause-specific} = DW_c * \text{time step scalar}

Vivarium can then observe YLDs due to all *modeled* causes AND/OR 
cause-specific YLDs accrued in the simulation. Notably, the sum across 
cause-specific YLDs will be greater than the "all-cause" YLDs in vivarium 
simulation outputs using this methodology.

Problem space
+++++++++++++

There are multiple problems with the default vivarium behavior not to model 
background morbidity, including:

- Comorbidity adjustment issues

  - Cannot calculate cause-specific YLDs adjusted for comorbidity even just among modeled causes, resulting in overestimation of cause-specific YLDs relative to "all cause" YLDs among modeled causes

  - Does not adjust for comorbidity due to unmodeled causes, resulting in overestimation of YLDs due to modeled causes relative to GBD estimates

- Underestimation of total YLDs

  - Only observe a subset of total YLDs within our simulation. While we can calculate YLDs averted between scenarios, we cannot accurately calculate percent reduction in all-cause YLDs or DALYs relative to baseline because we do not model YLDs due to all causes at baseline.

  - Causes us to overestimate impact of a death averted in our simulation. An averted death in the alternative relative to baseline scenario result in some number of YLLs averted, but really this person should then start accruing YLDs overtime, which will decrease the number of DALYs averted relative to baseline. 

Proposal
--------------

To address these issues, we propose to update the default vivarium behavior to 
model background morbidity in a similar manner to the default behavior to model 
background mortality. Additionally, we propose the incorporation of cause-specific 
COMO-adjusted YLDs into vivarium observers.

1. Background morbidity
+++++++++++++++++++++++

In order to model YLDs due to non-modeled background causes, we must estimate a 
"cause-deleted" disability weight that represents the disability weight for all
GBD causes except for those explicitly modeled in a given vivarium simulation. 
This "cause-deleted" disability weight should be adjusted for comorbidity of all
individual causes of disability included in background morbidity, but NOT adjusted
for comorbidity with modeled causes (which instead will be performed within 
the simulation).

The ideal approach to estimating this cause-deleted COMO adjusted disability weight
due to unmodeled causes would be to perform the COMO adjustment as is done in the 
central computation process while excluding modeled sequelae. This should be done
at the location/age/sex/year-specific level. Integrating the central computation
code into vivarium processes would be ideal so that we will replicate all of the
exceptions and maintain any regular updates to their process.

However, until this is able to be achieved, an interim solution will be to estimate
the DW due to background morbidity as the difference between the all-cause YLD rate 
and the sum of the YLD rate due to all modeled causes of disability at the 
location/age/sex/year-specific level:

.. math::

  DW_\text{background} = \text{YLD rate}_\text{c294} - \sum_{c=1}^n \text{YLD rate}_c

.. note::

  This interim solution will systematically underestimate the DW due to background morbidity.
  This underestimation will be larger when the relative share of YLDs due to modeled causes 
  of YLDs due to all causes is large.

.. todo::

  Attempt to quantify how different this approach will be from the COMO-estimated 
  other causes DW.

2. Adjusted YLD observer
++++++++++++++++++++++++

To align with this proposal, the default YLD observer in vivarium should function so that the
amount of YLDs due to cause :math:`YLDs_c` accrued on a given timestep is equal to:

.. math::

  YLDs_c = \frac{DW_c}{\sum_{mc=1}^n DW_\text{mc}} * DW_\text{overall} * \text{timestep scalar}

Where:

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Parameter
    - Definition
  * - :math:`YLDs_c`
    - YLDs accrued due to cause c on a given timestep for a given simulant
  * - :math:`DW_c`
    - Disability weight for cause c (prevalence-weighted average of sequelae DWs)
  * - :math:`\sum_{mc=1}^n DW_\text{mc}`
    - Sum of disability weights for all n modeled causes the simulant possesses, INCLUDING background other causes
  * - :math:`DW_\text{overall}`
    - :math:`1 - \prod_{mc=1}^n (1 - DW_\text{mc})`
  * - :math:`\text{timestep scalar}`
    - Duration of simulation timestep, in years

Potential use cases
+++++++++++++++++++


Challenges to consider
++++++++++++++++++++++

- Is the current behavior of cause DW equal to prevalence-weighted average of sequela DWs really the right thing to do?

  - Alternative would be to assign sequela-specific DW based on prevalence-weighted probability (assuming mutually exclusive sequelae)

Commit message:

add todo for alternate method

docs/source/model_design/vivarium_features/other_causes_ylds/index.rst, after:

..
  Section title decorators for this document:
  
  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============
  Section Level 1
  ---------------
  Section Level 2
  +++++++++++++++
  Section Level 3
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _other_causes_ylds:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

=========================================================
YLDs due to other causes
=========================================================

Years lived with disability (YLDs) are an important measure of health loss and 
contribute to estimates of disability adjusted life years (DALYs) in our model. 
This document discusses how YLDs are tracked in vivarium by default, how that 
compares to GBD methodology, and discusses potential improvements to this 
default behavior.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Background and Motivation
--------------------------

GBD methodology
++++++++++++++++

Disability weight estimation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The GBD study relies on disability weights (DWs) to estimate years lived with 
disability (YLDs). DWs represent the magnitude of health loss associated with a 
specific health outcome and are measured on a scale from 0 to 1; 0 implies a 
state equivalent to full health and 1 equivalent to death.

Disability weights have been estimated through a series of surveys, described 
in detail in the GBD methods appendix along with a complete listing of 
disability weight values for all health states included in the GBD study.

Comorbidity correction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The disability weights estimated through the process described above consider
each health state individually and must be corrected for the simultaneous 
presence of multiple disability-causing health states within a given 
individual. This correction accounts for the assumption that disability weights 
from comorbid conditions scale multiplicatively rather than additively. So in 
effect, the reduction in health due to a newly acquired cause of disability is 
quantified as greater for an individual who was previously in perfect health 
than for an individual who was already subject to some non-zero baseline level 
of morbidity.

The COMO process in GBD assumes total independence between health states and
does not account for any correlation that may exist between related health 
states (beyond correlation induced by location, age, and sex, which is 
accounted for through its stratified adjustments). As reported in the GBD 2019 
methods appendix, "[GBD] tested the contribution of dependent and independent 
comorbidity in the US MEPS data and found that 
**independent comorbidity was the dominant factor** even though well-known 
examples of dependent comorbidity exist, such as clustering of conditions 
like diabetes and stroke or anxiety and alcohol use disorders" (p. 475).

The GBD study performs this comorbidity correction (termed "COMO") 
using a microsimulation, described below. The microsimulation is performed at 
the age-, sex-, location-, and 
year-specific level. For GBD 2019, the population size of each microsimulation 
was 40,000. In this microsimulation, each simulant is exposed to an independent 
probability of having any of the sequelae including in GBD using the estimated 
sequela prevalence.

.. note::

  The COMO adjustment is run and maintained by IHME central computation. `The 
  repository can be found here (as of May, 2023) <https://stash.ihme.washington.edu/projects/CCGMAC/repos/como/browse>`_.

  According to correspondence with a central computation representative: the COMO
  adjustment ensures that no simulant may simultaneously possess mutually exclusive
  sequelae (mild AND moderate diarrhea, for instance), nor may they simultaneously
  possess mutually exclusive impairments (such as mild AND moderate anemia). A 
  simulant may, however, simultaneously possess more than one sequelae that correspond
  to the same healthstate (for example: the sequelae ectopic pregnancy and intestinal 
  perforation due to paratyphoid, which are both included in the abdominopelvic problem 
  healthstate. In this case, an individual who simultaneously possesses both of these 
  sequelae that share the same health state, the individual will in effect experience 
  the abdominopelvic problem healthstate as approximately twice as severe than if they 
  only possessed a one of these sequelae). 

    Note, a list of GBD sequelae and healthstate pairs can be obtained with the 
    :code:`db_queries.get_sequela_metadata()` shared function.

  Additionally, the COMO adjustment handles exceptions for impairments as well as 
  certain GBD causes (including injuries, sexual violence, and "residual" causes,
  epilepsy, and intellectual disability) for which DWs are estimated through separate, 
  custom processes.

  The COMO adjustment also handles aggregation of cause prevalence and incidence
  up the GBD cause hierarchy. In this process, some sub-causes of a parent cause assumed to 
  be independent (and scale multiplicatively) and others assumed to be mutually exclusive
  (and scale additively).

Once this population has been initialized, the comorbidity correction is 
performed as follows:

For each simulant, the overall disability weight is calculated as the 
multiplicative combination of each of the sequela that the simulant possesses 
according to the following equation:

.. math::

  DW_\text{overall} = 1 - \prod_{k=i}^j (1 - DW_k)

Where: :math:`DW_k` is the disability weight for the :math:`k`-*th* disease 
sequelae that the simulant possesses.

Once this overall disability weight is computed for each individual simulant, 
it is then disaggregated into its component parts once more to obtain 
cause-specific disability weights adjusted for comorbidity according to the 
following formula:

.. math::

  ADW_k = \frac{DW_k}{\sum_{k=i}^j DW_k} \times DW_\text{overall}

Where: :math:`ADW_k` is the comorbidity-adjusted disability weight for sequela 
:math:`k` among a given simulant.

Then, cause-specific YLDs per capita in an age-sex-location-year are computed 
as the sum of the adjusted DWs for each sequela across all *n* simulants in the 
microsimulation as:

.. math::
  
  \text{YLD rate}_k = \frac{\sum_{simulant=1}^n ADW_k}{n}

The implication of the COMO adjustment for GBD YLDs attributable to a parent 
cause should be exactly equal to the sum of YLDs attributed to each of its 
sub-causes. Additionally, the YLDs attributable to a given sequela after the 
COMO adjustment will be less than the product of the disability weight and the 
prevalence for that sequela.

Historical behavior in vivarium
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

For a given vivarium simulation, we have typically developed individual cause 
models for specific conditions. Conditions to include in a simulation are 
selected based on relevance to the research question and are not exhaustive of 
all conditions modeled in GBD. This poses a question of how to handle morbidity 
and mortality due to causes not explicitly modeled within our simulation 
("background" causes). Historically, vivarium has handled background morbidity 
differently from background mortality, as described below.

Background mortality
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Vivarium automatically models background mortality in addition to mortality due 
to modeled causes as mortality due to :code:`other_causes`. The cause-specific 
mortality rate of :code:`other_causes` is equal to:

.. math::

  CSMR_\text{other causes} = ACMR - \sum_{c=i}^n CSMR_c

Where: :math:`ACMR` is the all-cause mortality rate and :math:`CSMR_c` is the 
cause-specific mortality rate of a modeled cause :math:`c`.

Background morbidity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Historically, vivarium has **not** modeled background morbidity. Rather, by 
default, vivarium models morbidity due to modeled causes only. Among the 
modeled causes, a partial comorbidity adjustment is performed.

Specifically, for a simulant that possesses multiple causes of disability 
simultaneously, the YLDs accrued for that simulant in a given timestep are 
equal to:

.. math::

  YLDs_\text{all causes} = (1 - \prod_{c=i}^n (1 - DW_c)) * \text{time step scalar}

.. math::

  YLDs_\text{cause-specific} = DW_c * \text{time step scalar}

Vivarium can then observe YLDs due to all *modeled* causes AND/OR 
cause-specific YLDs accrued in the simulation. Notably, the sum across 
cause-specific YLDs will be greater than the "all-cause" YLDs in vivarium 
simulation outputs using this methodology.

Problem space
+++++++++++++

There are multiple problems with the default vivarium behavior not to model 
background morbidity, including:

- Comorbidity adjustment issues

  - Cannot calculate cause-specific YLDs adjusted for comorbidity even just among modeled causes, resulting in overestimation of cause-specific YLDs relative to "all cause" YLDs among modeled causes

  - Does not adjust for comorbidity due to unmodeled causes, resulting in overestimation of YLDs due to modeled causes relative to GBD estimates

- Underestimation of total YLDs

  - Only observe a subset of total YLDs within our simulation. While we can calculate YLDs averted between scenarios, we cannot accurately calculate percent reduction in all-cause YLDs or DALYs relative to baseline because we do not model YLDs due to all causes at baseline.

  - Causes us to overestimate impact of a death averted in our simulation. An averted death in the alternative relative to baseline scenario result in some number of YLLs averted, but really this person should then start accruing YLDs overtime, which will decrease the number of DALYs averted relative to baseline. 

Proposal
--------------

To address these issues, we propose to update the default vivarium behavior to 
model background morbidity in a similar manner to the default behavior to model 
background mortality. Additionally, we propose the incorporation of cause-specific 
COMO-adjusted YLDs into vivarium observers.

1. Background morbidity
+++++++++++++++++++++++

In order to model YLDs due to non-modeled background causes, we must estimate a 
"cause-deleted" disability weight that represents the disability weight for all
GBD causes except for those explicitly modeled in a given vivarium simulation. 
This "cause-deleted" disability weight should be adjusted for comorbidity of all
individual causes of disability included in background morbidity, but NOT adjusted
for comorbidity with modeled causes (which instead will be performed within 
the simulation).

The ideal approach to estimating this cause-deleted COMO adjusted disability weight
due to unmodeled causes would be to perform the COMO adjustment as is done in the 
central computation process while excluding modeled sequelae. This should be done
at the location/age/sex/year-specific level. Integrating the central computation
code into vivarium processes would be ideal so that we will replicate all of the
exceptions and maintain any regular updates to their process.

However, until this is able to be achieved, an interim solution will be to estimate
the DW due to background morbidity as the difference between the all-cause YLD rate 
and the sum of the YLD rate due to all modeled causes of disability at the 
location/age/sex/year-specific level:

.. math::

  DW_\text{background} = \text{YLD rate}_\text{c294} - \sum_{c=1}^n \text{YLD rate}_c

.. note::

  This interim solution will systematically underestimate the DW due to background morbidity.
  This underestimation will be larger when the relative share of YLDs due to modeled causes 
  of YLDs due to all causes is large.

.. todo::

  Update this section to alternate equation with notebook proof, but first generalize to multiple causes.

2. Adjusted YLD observer
++++++++++++++++++++++++

To align with this proposal, the default YLD observer in vivarium should function so that the
amount of YLDs due to cause :math:`YLDs_c` accrued on a given timestep is equal to:

.. math::

  YLDs_c = \frac{DW_c}{\sum_{mc=1}^n DW_\text{mc}} * DW_\text{overall} * \text{timestep scalar}

Where:

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Parameter
    - Definition
  * - :math:`YLDs_c`
    - YLDs accrued due to cause c on a given timestep for a given simulant
  * - :math:`DW_c`
    - Disability weight for cause c (prevalence-weighted average of sequelae DWs)
  * - :math:`\sum_{mc=1}^n DW_\text{mc}`
    - Sum of disability weights for all n modeled causes the simulant possesses, INCLUDING background other causes
  * - :math:`DW_\text{overall}`
    - :math:`1 - \prod_{mc=1}^n (1 - DW_\text{mc})`
  * - :math:`\text{timestep scalar}`
    - Duration of simulation timestep, in years

Potential use cases
+++++++++++++++++++


Challenges to consider
++++++++++++++++++++++

- Consider updating current behavior of cause DW equal to prevalence-weighted average of sequela DWs

  - Alternative would be to assign sequela-specific DW based on prevalence-weighted probability (assuming mutually exclusive sequelae)
