docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_mncnh_portfolio/pregnancy_module/module_document.rst, before:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_pregnancy_module:

======================================
Pregnancy module
======================================

.. contents::
  :local:
  :depth: 2

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This module initializes a maternal age and determines basic pregnancy outcome information such as term length, child sex, etc.

2.0 Module Diagram and Data
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

2.1 Module Diagram
----------------------

There is no diagram necessary for the pregnancy module. Instead, all instructions are detailed on the :ref:`MNCNH portfolio pregnancy model document <other_models_pregnancy_closed_cohort_mncnh>`. This document also contains a list of model assumptions and limitations as well as verification and validation criteria.

Module outputs are summarized in the table below. 

.. list-table:: Module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Output
    - Value
    - Note
  * - A. Maternal age
    - point value in years
    - 
  * - B. Pregnancy term duration
    - *partial* / *full*
    - 
  * - C. Birth outcome
    - *other* / *live_birth* / *stillbirth*
    - "Other" is equivalent to partial term pregnancies
  * - D. Child sex
    - *male* / *female*
    - 
  * - E. Gestational age
    - point value in days
    - N/A for partial term pregnancies
  * - F. Birthweight
    - point value in grams
    - N/A for partial term pregnancies
  * - G. Pregnancy duration
    - point value in weeks
    - Equal to gestational age for full term pregnancies

Starting in wave II of the simulation, there will be variables that influence pregnancy module outputs. These variables are listed below.

.. list-table:: Variables that affect pregnancy module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Variable
    - Affected outcome
    - Instructions for effect
    - Note
  * - IFA/MMS coverage (output from hemoglobin module)
    - * Birth outcome
      * Gestational age
      * Birthweight
    - See the :ref:`maternal supplementation intervention document <maternal_supplementation_intervention>`
    - NOTE: as of 4/9/2025 this intervention model document is not updated and ready for implementation
  * - IV iron coverage
    - * Birth outcome
      * Gestational age
      * Birthweight
    - See the :ref:`IV iron intervention document <intervention_iv_iron_antenatal>`
    - NOTE: as of 4/9/2025 the IV iron intervention model document is not updated and ready for implementation

Commit message:

Integrate facility choice docs into concept model

docs/source/models/concept_models/vivarium_mncnh_portfolio/pregnancy_module/module_document.rst, after:

.. role:: underline
    :class: underline

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_pregnancy_module:

======================================
Pregnancy module
======================================

.. contents::
  :local:
  :depth: 2

1.0 Overview
++++++++++++

This module initializes a maternal age and determines basic pregnancy outcome information such as term length, child sex, etc.

2.0 Module Diagram and Data
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

2.1 Module Diagram
----------------------

There is no diagram necessary for the pregnancy module. Instead, all instructions are detailed on the :ref:`MNCNH portfolio pregnancy model document <other_models_pregnancy_closed_cohort_mncnh>`. This document also contains a list of model assumptions and limitations as well as verification and validation criteria.

The inputs and outputs for this module are summarized in the tables below. 

.. list-table:: Module required inputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Input
    - Source module
    - Application
    - Note
  * - LBWSG propensity
    - :ref:`Initial attributes module <2024_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio_initial_attributes_module>`
    - Used to sample exposure value from the LBWSG exposure distribution. Ordering of the LBWSG exposure categories matters. see the "Special ordering of the categories" section on the :ref:`facility choice model document <2024_facility_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`
    - 


.. list-table:: Module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Output
    - Value
    - Note
  * - A. Maternal age
    - point value in years
    - 
  * - B. Pregnancy term duration
    - *partial* / *full*
    - 
  * - C. Birth outcome
    - *other* / *live_birth* / *stillbirth*
    - "Other" is equivalent to partial term pregnancies
  * - D. Child sex
    - *male* / *female*
    - 
  * - E. Gestational age
    - point value in days
    - N/A for partial term pregnancies. Must be assigned using LBWSG propensity value from the initial attributes module following the ordering rules described on the :ref:`facility choice model document <2024_facility_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`
  * - F. Birthweight
    - point value in grams
    - N/A for partial term pregnancies. Must be assigned using LBWSG propensity value from the initial attributes module following the ordering rules described on the :ref:`facility choice model document <2024_facility_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`
  * - G. Pregnancy duration
    - point value in weeks
    - Equal to gestational age for full term pregnancies

Starting in wave II of the simulation, there will be variables that influence pregnancy module outputs. These variables are listed below.

.. list-table:: Variables that affect pregnancy module outputs
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Variable
    - Affected outcome
    - Instructions for effect
    - Note
  * - IFA/MMS coverage (output from hemoglobin module)
    - * Birth outcome
      * Gestational age
      * Birthweight
    - See the :ref:`maternal supplementation intervention document <maternal_supplementation_intervention>`
    - NOTE: as of 4/9/2025 this intervention model document is not updated and ready for implementation
  * - IV iron coverage
    - * Birth outcome
      * Gestational age
      * Birthweight
    - See the :ref:`IV iron intervention document <intervention_iv_iron_antenatal>`
    - NOTE: as of 4/9/2025 the IV iron intervention model document is not updated and ready for implementation
