docs/source/models/intervention_models/neonatal/probiotics_intervention.rst, before:

.. _intervention_neonatal_probiotics:

=============================================
Probiotics for treating bacterial infections
=============================================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 1

.. list-table:: Abbreviations
  :widths: 15 15 15
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Abbreviation
    - Definition
    - Note
  * - BEmONC
    - Basic emergency obstetric and neonatal care
    - Operationalized as facilities without C-section capabilities
  * - CEmONC
    - Comprehensive emergency obstetric and neonatal care
    - Operationalized as facilities with capabilities to perform  C-section
  * - PAF
    - Population Attributable Fraction
    - 

Intervention Overview
-----------------------

Probiotics might be used to prevent bacterial infections in neonates, reducing the risk mortality.

This section describes how a probiotic-treatment intervention can be implemented and calibrated for the 
:ref:`MNCNH Portfolio model <2024_concept_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`.

.. list-table:: Affected Outcomes
  :widths: 15 15 15 15
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Outcome
    - Effect
    - Modeled?
    - Note (ex: is this relationship direct or mediated?)
  * - Neonatal sepsis and other neonatal infections Mortality Probability :math:`\text{CSMR}_i^\text{sepsis}`
    - Adjust multiplicatively using RR
    - Yes
    - For convenience, we will model this like a dichotomous risk factor; more details below

Baseline Coverage Data
++++++++++++++++++++++++

Baseline coverage for probiotics availability at health facilities should be 0% for both BEMONC and CEMONC 
facilities. 

.. list-table:: Baseline Coverage of Neonatal Probiotics (placeholder values)
  :widths: 15 15 15 15
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Birth Facility
    - Coverage Mean (%)
    - Coverage Distribution (%)
    - Notes
  * - Home Birth
    - 0
    - N/A
    - 
  * - BEmONC Facilities
    - 0
    - N/A
    - 
  * - CEmONC Facilities
    - 0
    - N/A
    -  


Vivarium Modeling Strategy
--------------------------

This intervention requires adding an attribute to all simulants to specify if a neonate has access to a facility with access to probiotics.  
Since the neonatal mortality model does not explicitly represent incidence of sepsis, we will not track explicitly if a simulant receives 
probiotics.  Instead the model will have different cause-specific mortality rates for sepsis for individuals with and without access to probiotics 
(implemented with a slightly confusing application of our ``Risk`` and ``RiskEffect`` components from ``vivarium_public_health``).

The ``Risk`` component adds an attribute to each simulant indicating whether the simulant has access to probiotics during the neonatal period, 
which we assume to be 0.0% regardless of birth facility choice in our baseline scenario.
births in BEmONC facilities have lower access than CEmONC facilities.

To make this work naturally with the ``RiskEffect`` component, it is best to think of the risk as "lack of access to probiotics".  
With this framing, the ``RiskEffect`` component requires data on (1) the relative risk of sepsis mortality for people with lack of access to 
probiotics, and (2) the population attributable fraction (PAF) of sepsis due to lack of access to probiotics.  We will use the decision tree 
below to find the probability of sepsis mortality with and without access to probiotics that are logically consistent with the baseline delivery 
facility rates and baseline probiotics coverage.

In Vivarium, this risk effect will modify the sepsis mortality pipeline, resulting in 

.. math::

   \text{CSMR}_i^\text{sepsis} = \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{\text{BW}_i, \text{GA}_i} \cdot (1 - \text{PAF}_\text{no probiotics}) \cdot \text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics}

where :math:`\text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics}` is simulant *i*'s individual relative risk for "no probiotics", meaning :math:`\text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics} = \text{RR}_\text{no probiotics}` 
if simulant *i* accesses a facility without probiotics, and :math:`\text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics} = 1` if simulant *i* accesses a facility *with* probiotics.

If there are other interventions also affecting the CSMR of sepsis, the pipeline will combine these effects, and we can write out the math for 
this risk explicitly as 

.. math::

   \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{i, \text{updated}} = \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{i, \text{original}} \cdot (1 - \text{PAF}_\text{no probiotics}) \cdot \text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics}

This reduces to the previous formula if there are no other interventions, and we would have 

.. math::

   \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{i, \text{original}} = \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{\text{BW}_i, \text{GA}_i}



.. list-table:: Risk Effect Parameters for Lack-of-Access-to-probiotics
  :widths: 15 15 15 15
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Parameter
    - Mean
    - Distribution
    - Notes
  * - Relative Risk
    - 1.67
    - :math:`\text{Normal}(1.67,0.08^2)`
    - Based on impact table provided to us by BMGF, which stated an RR of 0.60 for B. infantis on 0-7 day old hospitalized infants who are preterm
      or SGA at any facility.
  * - PAF
    - see below
    - see below
    - see `Calibration strategy` section below for details on how to calculate PAF that is consistent with RR, risk exposure, and facility choice model

Calibration Strategy
--------------------

The following decision tree shows all of the paths from delivery facility choice to probiotics availability.  Distinct paths in the tree correspond to disjoint events, 
which we can sum over to find the population probability of sepsis mortality.  The goal here is to use internally consistent conditional probabilities of sepsis mortality 
for the subpopulations with and without access to probiotics, so that the baseline scenario can track who has access to probiotics and still match the baseline sepsis 
mortality rate.

.. graphviz::

    digraph probiotics {
        rankdir = LR;
        facility [label="Facility type"]
        home [label="p_sepsis_without_probiotics"]
        BEmONC [label="probiotics?"]
        CEmONC [label="probiotics?"]
        BEmONC_wo [label="p_sepsis_without_probiotics"] 
        BEmONC_w [label="p_sepsis_with_probiotics"]
        CEmONC_wo [label="p_sepsis_without_probiotics"] 
        CEmONC_w [label="p_sepsis_with_probiotics"]

        facility -> home  [label = "home birth"]
        facility -> BEmONC  [label = "BEmONC"]
        facility -> CEmONC  [label = "CEmONC"]

        BEmONC -> BEmONC_w  [label = "available"]
        BEmONC -> BEmONC_wo  [label = "unavailable"]

        CEmONC -> CEmONC_w  [label = "available"]
        CEmONC -> CEmONC_wo  [label = "unavailable"]
    }

.. math::
    \begin{align*}
        p(\text{sepsis}) 
        &= \sum_{\text{paths without probiotics}} p(\text{path})\cdot p(\text{sepsis}|\text{no probiotics})\\
        &+ \sum_{\text{paths with probiotics}} p(\text{path})\cdot p(\text{sepsis}|\text{probiotics})\\[.1in]
        p(\text{sepsis}|\text{no probiotics}) &= \text{RR}_\text{no probiotics} \cdot p(\text{sepsis}|\text{probiotics})
    \end{align*}

where :math:`p(\text{sepsis})` is the probability of dying from sepsis in the general population, and :math:`p(\text{sepsis}|\text{probiotics})` 
and :math:`p(\text{sepsis}|\text{no probiotics})` are the probability of dying from sepsis in setting with and without access to probiotics.  
For each path through the decision tree, :math:`p(\text{path})` is the probability of that path; for example the path that includes the edges 
labeled BEmONC and unavailable occurs with probability that the birth is in a BEmONC facility times the probability that the facility has probiotics 
available.

When we fill in the location-specific values for delivery facility rates, probiotics coverage, relative risk of mortality with probiotics access, 
and mortality probability (which is also age-specific), this becomes a system of two linear equations with two unknowns (:math:`p(\text{sepsis}|\text{probiotics})` 
and :math:`p(\text{sepsis}|\text{no probiotics})`), which we can solve analytically using the same approach as in the :ref:`cpap calibration <cpap_calibration>`.

**Alternative PAF Derivation**: An alternative, and possibly simpler derivation of the PAF that will calibrate this model comes from the observation that 
:math:`\text{PAF} = 1 - \frac{1}{\mathbb{E}(\text{RR})}`.  If we define 

.. math::

   p(\text{no probiotics}) = \sum_{\text{paths without probiotics}} p(\text{path}),

then can use this to expand the identity

.. math::

   \text{PAF}_\text{no probiotics} = 1 - \frac{1}{\mathbb{E}(\text{RR})}.

Since our risk exposure has two categories,

.. math::

   \mathbb{E}(\text{RR}) = p(\text{no probiotics}) \cdot \text{RR}_\text{no probiotics} + (1 - p(\text{no probiotics})) \cdot 1.



Scenarios
---------

.. todo::

  Describe our general approach to scenarios, for example set coverage to different levels in different types of health facilities; then the specific values 
  for specific scenarios will be specified in the :ref:`MNCNH Portfolio model <2024_concept_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`.


Assumptions and Limitations
---------------------------

- We assume that probiotics availability captures actual use, and not simply the treatment being in the facility 
- We assume that the delivery facility is also the facility where a sick neonate will seek care for sepsis
- We assume that the relative risk of sepsis mortality with probiotics in practice is a value that we can find in the literature
- We have excluded the effect of probiotics on pneumonia mortality, because this cause is currently lumped with 'other causes'

Validation and Verification Criteria
------------------------------------

- Population-level mortality rate should be the same as when this intervention is not included in the model
- The ratio of sepsis deaths per birth among those without probiotics access divided by those with probiotics access should equal the relative risk parameter used in the model
- The baseline coverage of probiotics in each facility type should match the values in the artifact

References
------------

* https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD005496.pub4/full

Commit message:

Update probiotics intervention effective coverage

docs/source/models/intervention_models/neonatal/probiotics_intervention.rst, after:

.. _intervention_neonatal_probiotics:

=============================================
Probiotics for treating bacterial infections
=============================================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 1

.. list-table:: Abbreviations
  :widths: 15 15 15
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Abbreviation
    - Definition
    - Note
  * - BEmONC
    - Basic emergency obstetric and neonatal care
    - Operationalized as facilities without C-section capabilities
  * - CEmONC
    - Comprehensive emergency obstetric and neonatal care
    - Operationalized as facilities with capabilities to perform  C-section
  * - PAF
    - Population Attributable Fraction
    - 

Intervention Overview
-----------------------

Probiotics might be used to prevent bacterial infections in neonates, reducing the risk mortality.

This section describes how a probiotic-treatment intervention can be implemented and calibrated for the 
:ref:`MNCNH Portfolio model <2024_concept_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`.

.. list-table:: Affected Outcomes
  :widths: 15 15 15 15
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Outcome
    - Effect
    - Modeled?
    - Note (ex: is this relationship direct or mediated?)
  * - Neonatal sepsis and other neonatal infections Mortality Probability :math:`\text{CSMR}_i^\text{sepsis}`
    - Adjust multiplicatively using RR
    - Yes
    - For convenience, we will model this like a dichotomous risk factor; more details below

Baseline Coverage Data
++++++++++++++++++++++++

Baseline coverage for probiotics availability at health facilities should be 0% for both BEMONC and CEMONC 
facilities. 

.. list-table:: Baseline Coverage of Neonatal Probiotics (placeholder values)
  :widths: 15 15 15 15
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Birth Facility
    - Coverage Mean (%)
    - Coverage Distribution (%)
    - Notes
  * - Home Birth
    - 0
    - N/A
    - 
  * - BEmONC Facilities
    - 0
    - N/A
    - 
  * - CEmONC Facilities
    - 0
    - N/A
    -  


Vivarium Modeling Strategy
--------------------------

This intervention requires adding an attribute to all simulants to specify if a neonate has access to a facility with access to probiotics.  
Since the neonatal mortality model does not explicitly represent incidence of sepsis, we will not track explicitly if a simulant receives 
probiotics.  Instead the model will have different cause-specific mortality rates for sepsis for individuals with and without access to probiotics 
(implemented with a slightly confusing application of our ``Risk`` and ``RiskEffect`` components from ``vivarium_public_health``).

The target population of this intervention will be simulants in the early neonatal age group who are preterm (<37 weeks old).

The ``Risk`` component adds an attribute to each simulant indicating whether the simulant (if in the target population) has access to probiotics during the neonatal period, 
which we assume to be 0.0% regardless of birth facility choice in our baseline scenario.
births in BEmONC facilities have lower access than CEmONC facilities.

To make this work naturally with the ``RiskEffect`` component, it is best to think of the risk as "lack of access to probiotics".  
With this framing, the ``RiskEffect`` component requires data on (1) the relative risk of sepsis mortality for people with lack of access to 
probiotics, and (2) the population attributable fraction (PAF) of sepsis due to lack of access to probiotics.  We will use the decision tree 
below to find the probability of sepsis mortality with and without access to probiotics that are logically consistent with the baseline delivery 
facility rates and baseline probiotics coverage.

In Vivarium, this risk effect will modify the sepsis mortality pipeline, resulting in 

.. math::

   \text{CSMR}_i^\text{sepsis} = \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{\text{BW}_i, \text{GA}_i} \cdot (1 - \text{PAF}_\text{no probiotics}) \cdot \text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics}

where :math:`\text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics}` is simulant *i*'s individual relative risk for "no probiotics", meaning :math:`\text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics} = \text{RR}_\text{no probiotics}` 
if simulant *i* accesses a facility without probiotics, and :math:`\text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics} = 1` if simulant *i* accesses a facility *with* probiotics.

If there are other interventions also affecting the CSMR of sepsis, the pipeline will combine these effects, and we can write out the math for 
this risk explicitly as 

.. math::

   \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{i, \text{updated}} = \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{i, \text{original}} \cdot (1 - \text{PAF}_\text{no probiotics}) \cdot \text{RR}_i^\text{no probiotics}

This reduces to the previous formula if there are no other interventions, and we would have 

.. math::

   \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{i, \text{original}} = \text{CSMR}^\text{sepsis}_{\text{BW}_i, \text{GA}_i}



.. list-table:: Risk Effect Parameters for Lack-of-Access-to-probiotics
  :widths: 15 15 15 15
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Parameter
    - Mean
    - Distribution
    - Notes
  * - Relative Risk
    - 1.67
    - :math:`\text{Normal}(1.67,0.08^2)`
    - Based on impact table provided to us by BMGF, which stated an RR of 0.60 for B. infantis on 0-7 day old hospitalized infants who are preterm
      or SGA at any facility.
  * - PAF
    - see below
    - see below
    - see `Calibration strategy` section below for details on how to calculate PAF that is consistent with RR, risk exposure, and facility choice model

Calibration Strategy
--------------------

The following decision tree shows all of the paths from delivery facility choice to probiotics availability.  Distinct paths in the tree correspond to disjoint events, 
which we can sum over to find the population probability of sepsis mortality.  The goal here is to use internally consistent conditional probabilities of sepsis mortality 
for the subpopulations with and without access to probiotics, so that the baseline scenario can track who has access to probiotics and still match the baseline sepsis 
mortality rate.

.. graphviz::

    digraph probiotics {
        rankdir = LR;
        facility [label="Facility type"]
        home [label="p_sepsis_without_probiotics"]
        BEmONC [label="probiotics?"]
        CEmONC [label="probiotics?"]
        BEmONC_wo [label="p_sepsis_without_probiotics"] 
        BEmONC_w [label="p_sepsis_with_probiotics"]
        CEmONC_wo [label="p_sepsis_without_probiotics"] 
        CEmONC_w [label="p_sepsis_with_probiotics"]

        facility -> home  [label = "home birth"]
        facility -> BEmONC  [label = "BEmONC"]
        facility -> CEmONC  [label = "CEmONC"]

        BEmONC -> BEmONC_w  [label = "available"]
        BEmONC -> BEmONC_wo  [label = "unavailable"]

        CEmONC -> CEmONC_w  [label = "available"]
        CEmONC -> CEmONC_wo  [label = "unavailable"]
    }

.. math::
    \begin{align*}
        p(\text{sepsis}) 
        &= \sum_{\text{paths without probiotics}} p(\text{path})\cdot p(\text{sepsis}|\text{no probiotics})\\
        &+ \sum_{\text{paths with probiotics}} p(\text{path})\cdot p(\text{sepsis}|\text{probiotics})\\[.1in]
        p(\text{sepsis}|\text{no probiotics}) &= \text{RR}_\text{no probiotics} \cdot p(\text{sepsis}|\text{probiotics})
    \end{align*}

where :math:`p(\text{sepsis})` is the probability of dying from sepsis in the general population, and :math:`p(\text{sepsis}|\text{probiotics})` 
and :math:`p(\text{sepsis}|\text{no probiotics})` are the probability of dying from sepsis in setting with and without access to probiotics.  
For each path through the decision tree, :math:`p(\text{path})` is the probability of that path; for example the path that includes the edges 
labeled BEmONC and unavailable occurs with probability that the birth is in a BEmONC facility times the probability that the facility has probiotics 
available.

When we fill in the location-specific values for delivery facility rates, probiotics coverage, relative risk of mortality with probiotics access, 
and mortality probability (which is also age-specific), this becomes a system of two linear equations with two unknowns (:math:`p(\text{sepsis}|\text{probiotics})` 
and :math:`p(\text{sepsis}|\text{no probiotics})`), which we can solve analytically using the same approach as in the :ref:`cpap calibration <cpap_calibration>`.

**Alternative PAF Derivation**: An alternative, and possibly simpler derivation of the PAF that will calibrate this model comes from the observation that 
:math:`\text{PAF} = 1 - \frac{1}{\mathbb{E}(\text{RR})}`.  If we define 

.. math::

   p(\text{no probiotics}) = \sum_{\text{paths without probiotics}} p(\text{path}),

then can use this to expand the identity

.. math::

   \text{PAF}_\text{no probiotics} = 1 - \frac{1}{\mathbb{E}(\text{RR})}.

Since our risk exposure has two categories,

.. math::

   \mathbb{E}(\text{RR}) = p(\text{no probiotics}) \cdot \text{RR}_\text{no probiotics} + (1 - p(\text{no probiotics})) \cdot 1.



Scenarios
---------

.. todo::

  Describe our general approach to scenarios, for example set coverage to different levels in different types of health facilities; then the specific values 
  for specific scenarios will be specified in the :ref:`MNCNH Portfolio model <2024_concept_model_vivarium_mncnh_portfolio>`.


Assumptions and Limitations
---------------------------

- We assume that probiotics availability captures actual use, and not simply the treatment being in the facility 
- We assume that the delivery facility is also the facility where a sick neonate will seek care for sepsis
- We assume that the relative risk of sepsis mortality with probiotics in practice is a value that we can find in the literature
- We have excluded the effect of probiotics on pneumonia mortality, because this cause is currently lumped with 'other causes'

Validation and Verification Criteria
------------------------------------

- Population-level mortality rate should be the same as when this intervention is not included in the model
- The ratio of sepsis deaths per birth among those without probiotics access divided by those with probiotics access should equal the relative risk parameter used in the model
- The baseline coverage of probiotics in each facility type should match the values in the artifact

References
------------

* https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD005496.pub4/full
