docs/source/models/other_models/alzheimers_population/index.rst, before:

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _other_models_alzheimers_population:

===============================
Alzheimer's Population Model
===============================

.. contents::
  :local:

Overview
++++++++

The goal of this population model is to model only simulants with
Alzheimer's disease (and other dementias), in order to reduce the
necessary population size for the :ref:`CSU Alzheiemer's simulation
<2025_concept_model_vivarium_alzheimers>`. The model document is split
into two parts: 1) initializing the population, and 2) adding new
simulants during the simulated timeframe.

Initializing the Population
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Model Scale
---------------------

Let :math:`t_0` be the starting time of our simulation, let
:math:`X_{t_0}` be the size of our simulated population at
initialization (i.e., the initial population size per draw specified in
the concept model), and let :math:`X^\text{real}_{t_0}` be the
corresponding real-world population at time :math:`t_0` that our
simulation is supposed to represent. The **model scale**, :math:`S`, of
our simulation is defined to be :math:`S = X_{t_0} /
X^\text{real}_{t_0}`. We will use the model scale
both for initializing our simulated population and for adding new
simulants.

In our case, :math:`X^\text{real}_{t_0}` is the population of people
with Alzheimer's disease and other dementias at time :math:`t_0` in a
particular country. We can compute this as

.. math::

  X^\text{real}_{t_0} = p_\text{AD} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{t_0},

where :math:`Y^\text{real}_{t_0}` is the total population at time
:math:`t_0` in our simulated location according to GBD, and
:math:`p_\text{AD}` is the prevalence of Alzheimer's disease and other
dementias across all age groups and sexes in that location. Note that
the model scale can also be computed as :math:`S = Y_{t_0} /
Y^\text{real}_{t_0}`, where :math:`Y_{t_0} = X_{t_0} / p_\text{AD}` is
the size of an **imagined total model population** including all people
with and without Alzheiemer's disease, of which those with Alzheimer's
are the ones who appear in our simulation. Putting everything together,

.. math::
  :label: model_scale_eq

  S = \frac{X_{t_0}}{p_\text{AD}\cdot Y^\text{real}_{t_0}},

which computes the model scale in terms of known parameters.

Initializing Demographic Subgroups
-----------------------------------

Let :math:`g` denote a demographic subgroup of the population in a given
location, namely :math:`g = (\text{age group, sex})`. For each
demographic group :math:`g` and time :math:`t`, we generalize the
notation in the previous section to define the following
populations in demographic group :math:`g` at time :math:`t`:

* :math:`X_{g,t}` = the number of simulants in group :math:`g` at time
  :math:`t`
* :math:`X^\text{real}_{g,t}` = the real population corresponding to our
  simulated population :math:`X_{g,t}`
* :math:`Y_{g,t}` = the imagined total model population in group
  :math:`g`, including people with and without AD, of which
  :math:`X_{g,t}` counts the subset with AD
* :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` = the total real population in group
  :math:`g` at time :math:`t` according to GBD


We need to determine :math:`X_{g,t_0}` (the initial simulated
population) for each demographic group :math:`g`. Let :math:`p_{g,t}` be
the prevalence of Alzheimer's disease and other dementias in demographic
group :math:`g` at time :math:`t,` for a given location. Two relations
among the above quantities are:

.. math::

  \begin{align*}
  X_{g,t} = S \cdot X^\text{real}_{g,t}
  \quad\text{and}\quad
  X^\text{real}_{g,t} = p_{g,t} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t}.
  % X_{g,t} &= p_g \cdot Y_{g,t} \\
  % Y_{g,t} & = S \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t}
  \end{align*}

(For :math:`t\ne t_0`, the first relation assumes that our simulated
population accurately tracks the real-world population over time.)
Therefore, at time :math:`t_0`,

.. math::
  :label: initial_pop_eq

  X_{g,t_0}
  = S \cdot X^\text{real}_{g,t_0}
  = S\cdot p_{g,t_0} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t_0}
  = X_{t_0} \cdot \frac{p_{g,t_0}}{p_\text{AD}}
    \cdot \frac{Y^\text{real}_{g,t_0}}{Y^\text{real}_{t_0}},

where the final equality follows from plugging in formula
:eq:`model_scale_eq` for the model scale :math:`S`. This equation tells
us how many simulants to initialize into each demographic group based on
known parameters.

.. note::

  Another way to write :eq:`initial_pop_eq` is

  .. math::

    X_{g,t_0} = X_{t_0}
    \cdot \frac{\text{# of real people in subgroup $g$ with Alzheimer's}}
      {\text{# of real people in whole population with Alzheimer's}}.

  Thus, we could compute :math:`X_{g,t_0}` using prevalence counts from
  GBD instead of prevalence rates.

  To verify that :eq:`initial_pop_eq` gives us the correct total number of
  initial simulants, note that

  .. math::

    \begin{align*}
    \sum_g X_{g,t_0}
    = \sum_g X_{t_0}
      \cdot \frac{p_{g,t_0} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t_0}}
      {p_\text{AD} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{t_0}}
    &= X_{t_0} \cdot \sum_g
      \frac{X^\text{real}_{g,t_0}}{X^\text{real}_{t_0}} \\
    &= X_{t_0} \cdot
      \frac{\sum_g X^\text{real}_{g,t_0}}{X^\text{real}_{t_0}}
    = X_{t_0} \cdot
      \frac{X^\text{real}_{t_0}}{X^\text{real}_{t_0}}
    = X_{t_0}.
    \end{align*}

Adding New Simulants
++++++++++++++++++++

Let :math:`N_{g,t}` denote the number of new simulants in demographic
group :math:`g` that we want to add to the simulation at time :math:`t`.
We will assume that :math:`N_{g,t}` is a Poisson random variable with
mean
:math:`\lambda_{g,t} \cdot \Delta t \cdot 1_{\{\text{simulation step times}\}}(t)`,
where :math:`\lambda_{g,t}` is the entrance rate of new simulants
(measured in count of simulants per unit time) at time :math:`t`,
:math:`\Delta t` is the length of a simulation time step, and
:math:`1_A` is the indicator function of the set :math:`A` (the
indicator function zeros out the entrance rate at times when the
simulation is not taking a step). Our goal is to determine the entrance
rate :math:`\lambda_{g,t}` for each :math:`g` and :math:`t`.

Let :math:`A_g(t)` be the cumulative number of incident cases of AD by
time :math:`t` in demographic group :math:`g` in the real population.
Since our simulation is scaled down by a factor of :math:`S`, the rate
at which we want to add simulants is

.. math::

  \lambda_{g,t} = S \cdot A_g'(t),

where :math:`A_g'(t)` is the derivative of :math:`A_g(t)` with respect
to :math:`t`. The following subsection describes how we will calculate
the entrance rate :math:`\lambda_{g,t}`.

Calculating entrance rate via AD incidence rate
-----------------------------------------------

We rewrite this in terms of quantities that we can estimate from the
available data:

.. math::
  :label: AD_entrance_rate_eq

  \lambda_{g,t}
  = S \cdot A_g'(t)
  = S \cdot \frac{A_g'(t)}{Y^\text{real}_{g,t}}
    \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t}
  = S \cdot i_{g,t} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t},

where :math:`i_{g,t} = A_g'(t) /Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` is the **total
population incidence hazard** of AD in demographic group :math:`g` at
time :math:`t`. We know the model scale :math:`S` from
:eq:`model_scale_eq` above, and we can estimate the quantities
:math:`i_{g,t}` and :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` from GBD as
follows.

Let :math:`y(t)` denote the year to which time :math:`t` belongs. If we
assume that the hazard :math:`i_{g,t}` is constant throughout the year
:math:`y(t)`, then it is equal to its person-time-average over the year,
which is the **total population incidence rate**:

.. math::

  i_{g,t}
  = \frac{\text{# of incident cases of AD in group $g$ in year $y(t)$}}
    {\text{total person-years in group $g$ in year $y(t)$}}.

This is the :ref:`raw AD incidence rate we pull from GBD <total
population incidence rate>` (*not* the susceptible population incidence
rate usually calculated by Vivarium Inputs). If we assume that the
population :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` is constant throughout the year
:math:`y(t)`, then it is equal to its time-average over the year:

.. math::

  Y^\text{real}_{g,t}
  = \text{average population in group $g$ during the year $y(t)$}.

This is the population we pull from GBD using get_population. Thus,
:eq:`AD_entrance_rate_eq` expresses the entrance rate
:math:`\lambda_{g,t}` in terms of quantities we can estimate from data.

.. note::

  Based on plots from GBD compare, we will make the simplifying
  assumption that for each demographic group :math:`g`, the Alzheimer's
  incidence rate :math:`i_{g,t}` does not change over time. Thus, we
  will use GBD 2021 data and assume that :math:`i_{g,t}` equals the AD
  incidence rate in 2021 from for all times :math:`t`.

  For Model 2 of the Alzheimer's simulation, we will use GBD 2021 data
  and assume that the total population :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}`
  equals the average population in 2021 for all times :math:`t`. For
  Models 3 and higher, we will use forecasted data from FHS to estimate
  :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` as the average population in year
  :math:`y(t)` for years 2025 through 2050, then assume the total
  population remains constant thereafter.

To summarize, here is the algorithm for adding new simulants at time
:math:`t`, assuming that :math:`t` is a step time of the simulation:

Alternative view using incidence count
--------------------------------------

The most direct way to estimate :math:`A_g'(t)` is to assume it is
constant, in which case it equals its time-average.  For example, if
:math:`y(t)` denotes the year to which time :math:`t` belongs, and we
assume :math:`A_g'(t)` is constant during the year :math:`y(t)`, then

.. math::

  A_g(t)
  = \frac{\text{# of incident cases of AD in group $g$ in year $y(t)$}}
    {\text{1 year}}.

Therefore, the expected number of simulants we want...

We can pull the number of incident cases of AD from GBD.

Commit message:

make things a bit more presentable

docs/source/models/other_models/alzheimers_population/index.rst, after:

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++

  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.

.. _other_models_alzheimers_population:

===============================
Alzheimer's Population Model
===============================

.. contents::
  :local:

Overview
++++++++

The goal of this population model is to model only simulants with
Alzheimer's disease (and other dementias), in order to reduce the
necessary population size for the :ref:`CSU Alzheiemer's simulation
<2025_concept_model_vivarium_alzheimers>`. The model document is split
into two parts: 1) initializing the population, and 2) adding new
simulants during the simulated timeframe.

Initializing the Population
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Model Scale
---------------------

Let :math:`t_0` be the starting time of our simulation, let
:math:`X_{t_0}` be the size of our simulated population at
initialization (i.e., the initial population size per draw specified in
the concept model), and let :math:`X^\text{real}_{t_0}` be the
corresponding real-world population at time :math:`t_0` that our
simulation is supposed to represent. The **model scale**, :math:`S`, of
our simulation is defined to be :math:`S = X_{t_0} /
X^\text{real}_{t_0}`. We will use the model scale
both for initializing our simulated population and for adding new
simulants.

In our case, :math:`X^\text{real}_{t_0}` is the population of people
with Alzheimer's disease and other dementias at time :math:`t_0` in a
particular country. We can compute this as

.. math::

  X^\text{real}_{t_0} = p_\text{AD} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{t_0},

where :math:`Y^\text{real}_{t_0}` is the total population at time
:math:`t_0` in our simulated location according to GBD, and
:math:`p_\text{AD}` is the prevalence of Alzheimer's disease and other
dementias across all age groups and sexes in that location. Note that
the model scale can also be computed as :math:`S = Y_{t_0} /
Y^\text{real}_{t_0}`, where :math:`Y_{t_0} = X_{t_0} / p_\text{AD}` is
the size of an **imagined total model population** including all people
with and without Alzheiemer's disease, of which those with Alzheimer's
are the ones who appear in our simulation. Putting everything together,

.. math::
  :label: model_scale_eq

  S = \frac{X_{t_0}}{p_\text{AD}\cdot Y^\text{real}_{t_0}},

which computes the model scale in terms of known parameters.

Initializing Demographic Subgroups
-----------------------------------

Let :math:`g` denote a demographic subgroup of the population in a given
location, namely :math:`g = (\text{age group, sex})`. For each
demographic group :math:`g` and time :math:`t`, we generalize the
notation in the previous section to define the following
populations in demographic group :math:`g` at time :math:`t`:

* :math:`X_{g,t}` = the number of simulants in group :math:`g` at time
  :math:`t`
* :math:`X^\text{real}_{g,t}` = the real population corresponding to our
  simulated population :math:`X_{g,t}`
* :math:`Y_{g,t}` = the imagined total model population in group
  :math:`g`, including people with and without AD, of which
  :math:`X_{g,t}` counts the subset with AD
* :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` = the total real population in group
  :math:`g` at time :math:`t` according to GBD


We need to determine :math:`X_{g,t_0}` (the initial simulated
population) for each demographic group :math:`g`. Let :math:`p_{g,t}` be
the prevalence of Alzheimer's disease and other dementias in demographic
group :math:`g` at time :math:`t,` for a given location. Two relations
among the above quantities are:

.. math::

  \begin{align*}
  X_{g,t} = S \cdot X^\text{real}_{g,t}
  \quad\text{and}\quad
  X^\text{real}_{g,t} = p_{g,t} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t}.
  % X_{g,t} &= p_g \cdot Y_{g,t} \\
  % Y_{g,t} & = S \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t}
  \end{align*}

(For :math:`t\ne t_0`, the first relation assumes that our simulated
population accurately tracks the real-world population over time.)
Therefore, at time :math:`t_0`,

.. math::
  :label: initial_pop_eq

  X_{g,t_0}
  = S \cdot X^\text{real}_{g,t_0}
  = S\cdot p_{g,t_0} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t_0}
  = X_{t_0} \cdot \frac{p_{g,t_0}}{p_\text{AD}}
    \cdot \frac{Y^\text{real}_{g,t_0}}{Y^\text{real}_{t_0}},

where the final equality follows from plugging in formula
:eq:`model_scale_eq` for the model scale :math:`S`. This equation tells
us how many simulants to initialize into each demographic group based on
known parameters.

.. note::

  Another way to write :eq:`initial_pop_eq` is

  .. math::

    X_{g,t_0} = X_{t_0}
    \cdot \frac{\text{# of real people in subgroup $g$ with Alzheimer's}}
      {\text{# of real people in whole population with Alzheimer's}}.

  Thus, we could compute :math:`X_{g,t_0}` using prevalence counts from
  GBD instead of prevalence rates.

  To verify that :eq:`initial_pop_eq` gives us the correct total number of
  initial simulants, note that

  .. math::

    \begin{align*}
    \sum_g X_{g,t_0}
    = \sum_g X_{t_0}
      \cdot \frac{p_{g,t_0} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t_0}}
      {p_\text{AD} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{t_0}}
    &= X_{t_0} \cdot \sum_g
      \frac{X^\text{real}_{g,t_0}}{X^\text{real}_{t_0}} \\
    &= X_{t_0} \cdot
      \frac{\sum_g X^\text{real}_{g,t_0}}{X^\text{real}_{t_0}}
    = X_{t_0} \cdot
      \frac{X^\text{real}_{t_0}}{X^\text{real}_{t_0}}
    = X_{t_0}.
    \end{align*}

Adding New Simulants
++++++++++++++++++++

Let :math:`N_{g,t}` denote the number of new simulants in demographic
group :math:`g` that we want to add to the simulation at time :math:`t`.
We will assume that :math:`N_{g,t}` is a Poisson random variable with
mean
:math:`\lambda_{g,t} \cdot \Delta t \cdot 1_{\{\text{simulation step times}\}}(t)`,
where :math:`\lambda_{g,t}` is the entrance rate of new simulants
(measured in count of simulants per unit time) at time :math:`t`,
:math:`\Delta t` is the length of a simulation time step, and
:math:`1_A` is the indicator function of the set :math:`A` (the
indicator function zeros out the entrance rate at times when the
simulation is not taking a step). Our goal is to determine the entrance
rate :math:`\lambda_{g,t}` for each :math:`g` and :math:`t`.

Let :math:`A_g(t)` be the cumulative number of incident cases of AD by
time :math:`t` in demographic group :math:`g` in the real population.
Since our simulation is scaled down by a factor of :math:`S`, the rate
at which we want to add simulants is

.. math::

  \lambda_{g,t} = S \cdot A_g'(t),

where :math:`A_g'(t)` is the derivative of :math:`A_g(t)` with respect
to :math:`t`. The following subsection describes how we will calculate
the entrance rate :math:`\lambda_{g,t}`.

Calculating entrance rate via AD incidence rate
-----------------------------------------------

To calculate :math:`\lambda_{g,t}`, we rewrite it in terms of quantities
that we can estimate from the available data:

.. math::
  :label: AD_entrance_rate_eq

  \lambda_{g,t}
  = S \cdot A_g'(t)
  = S \cdot \frac{A_g'(t)}{Y^\text{real}_{g,t}}
    \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t}
  = S \cdot i_{g,t} \cdot Y^\text{real}_{g,t},

where :math:`i_{g,t} = A_g'(t) /Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` is the **total
population incidence hazard** of AD in demographic group :math:`g` at
time :math:`t`. We know the model scale :math:`S` from
:eq:`model_scale_eq` above, and we can estimate the quantities
:math:`i_{g,t}` and :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` from GBD as
follows.

Let :math:`y(t)` denote the year to which time :math:`t` belongs. If we
assume that the hazard :math:`i_{g,t}` is constant throughout the year
:math:`y(t)`, then it is equal to its person-time-average over the year,
which is the **total population incidence rate**:

.. math::

  i_{g,t}
  = \frac{\text{# of incident cases of AD in group $g$ in year $y(t)$}}
    {\text{total person-years in group $g$ in year $y(t)$}}.

This is the :ref:`raw AD incidence rate we pull from GBD <total
population incidence rate>` (*not* the susceptible population incidence
rate usually calculated by Vivarium Inputs). If we assume that the
population :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` is constant throughout the year
:math:`y(t)`, then it is equal to its time-average over the year:

.. math::

  Y^\text{real}_{g,t}
  = \text{average population in group $g$ during the year $y(t)$}.

This is the population we pull from GBD using get_population. Thus,
:eq:`AD_entrance_rate_eq` expresses the entrance rate
:math:`\lambda_{g,t}` in terms of quantities we can estimate from data.

.. note::

  Based on plots from GBD compare, we will make the simplifying
  assumption that for each demographic group :math:`g`, the Alzheimer's
  incidence rate :math:`i_{g,t}` does not change over time. Thus, we
  will use GBD 2021 data and assume that :math:`i_{g,t}` equals the AD
  incidence rate in 2021 from for all times :math:`t`.

  For Model 2 of the Alzheimer's simulation, we will use GBD 2021 data
  and assume that the total population :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}`
  equals the average population in 2021 for all times :math:`t`. For
  Models 3 and higher, we will use forecasted data from FHS to estimate
  :math:`Y^\text{real}_{g,t}` as the average population in year
  :math:`y(t)` for years 2025 through 2050, then assume the total
  population remains constant thereafter.

To summarize, here is the algorithm for adding new simulants at time
:math:`t`, assuming that :math:`t` is a step time of the simulation: ...

Alternative view using incidence count
--------------------------------------

The most direct way to estimate :math:`A_g'(t)` is to assume it is
constant, in which case it equals its time-average.  For example, if
:math:`y(t)` denotes the year to which time :math:`t` belongs, and we
assume :math:`A_g'(t)` is constant during the year :math:`y(t)`, then

.. math::

  A_g(t)
  = \frac{\text{# of incident cases of AD in group $g$ in year $y(t)$}}
    {\text{1 year}}.

This ends up being equivalent to the method using incidence rates above,
but whereas the *count* of incident cases is likely to vary considerably
due to changing demographics, the incidence *rate* of AD is likely to
remain fairly stable over time. Thus, using using the incidence rate and
the total population is a more appropriate way to use the available
data.
