docs/source/model_design/general_reference_material/bliss/index.rst, before:

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++
  
  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.


.. _bliss:

==================
BLISS Style Guide
==================

Building Language Inclusivity into Simulation Science (BLISS) is an important part of
our team's work! Here you will find our ongoing style guide for incorporating inclusive 
language into our day-to-day work.


1.0 Overview 
++++++++++++
As part of our team and organization's larger DEI efforts, we are committed to researching
and building a style guide so as to incorporate inclusive language into our day-to-day work
and to address the harmful conflation of sex and gender in public health research and data. 
We hope this page will serve as a useful guide to members of the Simulation Science team as
well as other teams at IHME!

1.1 Guiding Principles
----------------------
In this section, we will outline the guiding principles of BLISS.

1.2 Glossary of General Terminology
-----------------------------------
In this section, we will create a glossary of general terminology that will be used 
throughout this style guide (e.g., for starters, we should explicitly define sex and 
gender; SGM) (include visual of 'Do's and Don'ts)

2.0 Acknowledging Limitations in Peer Research
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
In this section, we will discuss how to acknowledge limitations in external data sources
used in our research, the different scenarios in which sex/gender conflation may occur and
how to appropriately articulate these issues in our reports, publications, and other work.  

2.1 Terminology 
---------------

2.2 Methodology
---------------

2.2.1 Imperfect Proxies 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Discuss the implications of imperfect proxy measures and how they correspond to what is
exactly being measured.  

3.0 Discussing Simulation Science Findings
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
In this section, we will elaborate on how to incorporate BLISS principles into our own 
research processes and calculations.  

3.1 Table Presentation
----------------------

3.2 Measurement Error
---------------------
In this section, we will elaborate on how misinterpretations of sex/gender might affect 
results.

3.3 Other Gender-Inclusive Guides
---------------------------------

- DEI Research Guide
- Design team guidelines for discussing gender, sex, and sexuality
- Gates Foundation
- World Health Organization


4.0 BLISS in Action 
+++++++++++++++++++
In this section, we will use case studies to explore the different ways in which 
BLISS principles can be practically applied to specific areas of public health research. 
Elaborate on lessons learned from other projects in which we've used BLISS (e.g., VEHSS
DR paper; IV Iron communications and IDM Symposium)

5.0 References
++++++++++++++
.. [Bauer, 2022]
    `Sex and Gender Multidimensionality in Epidemiologic Research.` American Journal of Epidemiology, Oxford University Press, 30 September 2022, https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/192/1/122/6747669. 

.. [Ritz and Greaves, 2022]
    `Transcending the Male-Female Binary in Biomedical Research: Constellations, Heterogeneity, and Mechanism When Considering Sex and Gender.` International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 30 March 2022, https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/19/7/4083.

Commit message:

Add links to contact info

docs/source/model_design/general_reference_material/bliss/index.rst, after:

..
  Section title decorators for this document:

  ==============
  Document Title
  ==============

  Section Level 1 (#.0)
  +++++++++++++++++++++
  
  Section Level 2 (#.#)
  ---------------------

  Section Level 3 (#.#.#)
  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Section Level 4
  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  Section Level 5
  '''''''''''''''

  The depth of each section level is determined by the order in which each
  decorator is encountered below. If you need an even deeper section level, just
  choose a new decorator symbol from the list here:
  https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#sections
  And then add it to the list of decorators above.


.. _bliss:

==================
BLISS Style Guide
==================

Building Language Inclusivity into Simulation Science (BLISS) is an important part of
our team's work! Here you will find our ongoing style guide for incorporating inclusive 
language into our day-to-day work.


1.0 Overview 
++++++++++++
As part of our team and organization's larger DEI efforts, we are committed to researching
and building a style guide so as to incorporate inclusive language into our day-to-day work
and to address the harmful conflation of sex and gender in public health research and data. 
We hope this page will serve as a useful guide to members of the Simulation Science team as
well as other teams at IHME!

On this page you will find our guiding principles, a glossary of commonly used terms related
to BLISS, recommendations for how to address sex/gender-related limitations in external data
sources, discussion of the implications of imperfect proxy measures with regards to sex/gender,
examples of how our team has incorporated BLISS into our work process, and more! 

If you have any questions or comments about the content on this page - please reach out! You can
contact us directly `on GitHub <https://github.com/ihmeuw/vivarium_research/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Abliss>`_ or anonymously 
on our `team HUB page <https://hub.ihme.washington.edu/display/COS/BLISS%3A+Building+Language+Inclusivity+into+Simulation+Science>`_.  

1.1 Guiding Principles
----------------------
In this section, we will outline the guiding principles of BLISS.

1.2 Glossary of General Terminology
-----------------------------------
In this section, we will create a glossary of general terminology that will be used 
throughout this style guide (e.g., for starters, we should explicitly define sex and 
gender; SGM) (include visual of 'Do's and Don'ts)

2.0 Acknowledging Limitations in Peer Research
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
In this section, we will discuss how to acknowledge limitations in external data sources
used in our research, the different scenarios in which sex/gender conflation may occur and
how to appropriately articulate these issues in our reports, publications, and other work.  

2.1 Terminology 
---------------

2.2 Methodology
---------------

2.2.1 Imperfect Proxies 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Discuss the implications of imperfect proxy measures and how they correspond to what is
exactly being measured.  

3.0 Discussing Simulation Science Findings
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
In this section, we will elaborate on how to incorporate BLISS principles into our own 
research processes and calculations.  

3.1 Table Presentation
----------------------

3.2 Measurement Error
---------------------
In this section, we will elaborate on how misinterpretations of sex/gender might affect 
results.

3.3 Other Gender-Inclusive Guides
---------------------------------

- DEI Research Guide
- Design team guidelines for discussing gender, sex, and sexuality
- Gates Foundation
- World Health Organization


4.0 BLISS in Action 
+++++++++++++++++++
In this section, we will use case studies to explore the different ways in which 
BLISS principles can be practically applied to specific areas of public health research. 
Elaborate on lessons learned from other projects in which we've used BLISS (e.g., VEHSS
DR paper; IV Iron communications and IDM Symposium)

5.0 References
++++++++++++++

.. [Bauer, 2022]
    `Sex and Gender Multidimensionality in Epidemiologic Research.` American Journal of Epidemiology, Oxford University Press, 30 September 2022, https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/192/1/122/6747669. 

.. [Ritz and Greaves, 2022]
    `Transcending the Male-Female Binary in Biomedical Research: Constellations, Heterogeneity, and Mechanism When Considering Sex and Gender.` International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 30 March 2022, https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/19/7/4083.
